# Method validation of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin for simultaneous determination in pesticide formulation using simplifed reverse phase high‑performance liquid chromatography (RP‑HPLC) method and estimation of measurement uncertainty

Reema Chaudhary1,2 · Rakhi Singh1 $\cdot$ Prabal Pratap Singh2 $\cdot$ Mukul Das1

Received: 1 May 2025 / Accepted: 2 September 2025   
$\circledcirc$ The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2025

# Abstract

In the manufacturing process of pesticide formulations, quality control plays a crucial part in ensuring its efectiveness and meeting requirements of regulatory for safe use. In this paper, a simplifed HPLC-based method has been developed for simultaneous quantitative determination of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin in $1 0 \%$ EC formulation using a C-18 analytical column $1 5 0 \ \mathrm { m m } \mathrm { X } 4 . 6 \ \mathrm { m m } \mathrm { X } 5 \ \mu \mathrm { m } )$ . Based on chromatographic separation with good resolution, acetonitrile: water (80:20, v/v) was selected as mobile phase in isocratic mode with a fow rate of $1 . 2 ~ \mathrm { m L / m i n }$ at a constant column temperature of $3 0 ~ ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ and UV detection at $2 2 0 \mathrm { n m }$ . The method was validated in line with SANCO/3030/99 rev. 5 guidelines encompassing the key parameters system suitability, linearity, precision, recovery, LOD & LOQ. The validation parameters were found within acceptance criteria. The LOD and LOQ for Pyriproxyfen was $8 . 6 \mathrm { m g / L }$ and $2 6 . 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ while that of Bifenthrin was $1 0 . 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ and $3 0 . 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ , respectively. Precision with acceptable $\% { \bf R } { \bf S } { \bf D }$ of $< 2 \%$ and recoveries ranging from 80 to $1 2 0 \%$ were obtained. Further escorting the decision making and confdence in the reliability of the produced data, measurement uncertainty using Eurachem/ CITAC procedure were obtained. The contributions to the uncertainty of measurement were from sample preparation, calibration standards preparation, calibration curve, and purity data. The contribution to the uncertainty of measurement from the analysis by HPLC were repeatability and intra-lab reproducibility. The combined expanded uncertainty of measurement was between $0 . 1 5 \%$ and $0 . 1 9 \%$ . The proposed analytical method is suitable for simultaneous quantitative determination of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin in respective formulations.

Keywords Method validation $\cdot$ Combination formulation $\cdot$ Bifenthrin and pyriproxyfen $\cdot$ RP-HPLC $\cdot$ Measurement uncertainty

# Introduction

In agriculture, the use of pesticides has played a crucial role in the amplifcation of agricultural production. To assure the crop producers that their crops are adequately well protected, this requires pesticide products to be of high quality which can provide efcient control of pests and plant diseases. Agriculture products of substandard quality may include imported or locally produced pesticides, especially the so-called generics, degraded, expired and other kinds of low-quality products. In addition, the problems in concern with adulteration is of great importance [1]. Mostly adequate standards of quality are not maintained by local formulators, maybe due to inexperience, inadequate facilities, and lack of technical knowledge. Hence, regular quality control of pesticides is essential to facilitate their safe and efcient use and to magnify agricultural productivity while at the same time protecting the farmers, consumers and the environment. The safety of pesticide products remains an issue of great worldwide concern [2–4]. Improper dosage and overuse of low-quality pesticides often contribute to the accumulation of obsolete pesticide stocks in the soils of developing countries [1, 5]. In developing countries, especially in Africa, approximately $3 0 \%$ of pesticides marketed reportedly do not meet internationally accepted quality standards, which poses a serious threat [6]. Hence, Pesticide formulation analysis (PFA) is a crucial part in the pest control manufacturing process; modern agriculture to ensure that the pesticide formulation produced is efective, stable and safe for use meeting regulatory requirements [5].

Regulatory authorities throughout the world are focused on monitoring the quality of pesticide products, particularly their active ingredient content. For complex formulations with multiple active ingredients and additives, more sophisticated instrumental techniques like chromatography, spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry might be necessary to achieve accurate and comprehensive analysis. The substandard pesticides can be detected by PFA, which gives farmers the right to take compensation from the company. Therefore, the future implications of pesticide formulation analysis are signifcant and safeguarding the crop’s health. PFA ensures production of quality pesticides from industries, which in turn helps scientists to carry out quality research while evaluating pesticides against insect pests before shortlisting them. It also creates trust among dealers and boosts their business [5].

Moreover, methods employed for the determination of single active ingredients are basically not applicable to formulations with two or more active ingredients of that compound together with other pesticides. Therefore, utmost precautions should be taken while applying an analytical method to combination formulations. It has become a global requirement that laboratories accredited according to International Standard ISO/IEC 17025:2005 [7] contain the general requirements for technical competence. The analytical method should be ft for its intended purpose and fulfll the quality requirements in terms of recovery, precision, sensitivity and specifcity [1].

Nowadays new formulations containing two or more active ingredients are formulated to broaden the spectrum of activity; minimizing the tank mixing efort; making it convenient for farmers to use single formulation in their crop and making it cost efective [8]. However, there are only very few “multi analyte”/“multi pesticide” methods designed for simultaneous measurement of a wider range of pesticides. With the course of years, the composition of formulations is also changed but methods are not revised at the same pace to take these changes into account. Therefore, formulation control laboratories cannot utilize regular methods of analysis. Consequently, there is a great need for laboratories to have access to simplifed analytical methods that could be used under simplifed conditions but at the same quality and reliability of results [1, 5].

Combined formulations of bifenthrin and pyriproxyfen represent a strategic approach to pest management that not only targets adult insects but also disrupts their development, thereby reducing the overall population. The dissipation studies of bifenthrin and pyriproxyfen combination formulation as $1 0 \%$ EC under feld conditions have been reported in chili and brinjal crops along with the validation of analytical method for simultaneous quantifcation of bifenthrin and pyriproxyfen residues using modifed QuEChERS method and employing liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) [9].

The driving force in analytical method development has been the industry’s particular interest in specifc method for their respective formulations. So far as there is no universal HPLC method available for simultaneous quantifcation of bifenthrin and pyriproxyfen, for monitoring the batch-tobatch quality of the formulation, the present work was carried out to develop a unique HPLC based analytical method for simultaneous quantitative measurement of bifenthrin and pyriproxyfen in $1 0 \%$ EC formulation. This method is most suitable and can easily be adopted on a commercial scale by any quality control laboratory in respective formulated products.

# Materials and method

# Chemicals and reagents

Certifed Reference Materials (CRMs) of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin with purity of $9 9 . 7 \%$ and $9 5 \%$ , respectively, were procured from $\mathbf { M } / \mathbf { s }$ Asian Research Foundation, Dharamshala, H.P., India. Acetonitrile, HPLC grade, Qualigens Fine Chemicals, Mumbai, India, make and Milli-Q-water were used as solvent for mobile phase preparation. A combination formulation of Pyriproxyfen $1 0 \% +$ Bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC, Batch No. B22092310, Date of Expiry 22/09/2024, was received from M/s Parijat Industries Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India.

# HPLC conditions and method optimization

A combination of acetonitrile and water was used as a mobile phase based on the solubility of the analyte, i.e., pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin. Optimization of mobile phase for good separation of analytes with better resolution were checked with diferent ratios of acetonitrile and water. To obtain the optimized chromatographic response of the analyte, diferent fow rates of the mobile phase were tested. The separation process was carried out using a C-18 column at varying temperatures. The chromatographic analysis was conducted in isocratic mode with the mobile phase. Further, the identifcation of $\lambda$ -max of both the analytes was carried out utilizing diferent UV wavelengths ranging from 190 to $4 0 0 \mathrm { n m }$ .

# Instrumentation and chromatographic conditions

The HPLC system of Shimadzu Prominence-I LC-2030C Plus with UV detector consisting of quaternary pump and autosampler injection system was used for separation of analytes followed by its quantifcation. The isocratic fow through a symmetry C 18 column $1 5 0 \mathrm { m m } { \times } 4 . 6 \mathrm { m m }$ , $5 \mu \mathrm { m }$ particle size), maintained at $3 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ , injection volume of $1 0 \mu \mathrm { l }$ with detection at $2 2 0 \mathrm { n m }$ showed good chromatographic separation. Acetonitrile and milli-Q-Water as solvent system for mobile phase with ratio of 80:20 (v/v) at fow rate $1 . 2 \mathrm { m L }$ min showed elution of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin at 4.6 and $1 3 . 0 \mathrm { m i n }$ , respectively.

# Preparation of standard solutions

An amount of $1 0 . 0 8 ~ \mathrm { { m g } }$ of Pyriproxyfen reference standard (purity of $9 9 . 7 \%$ ) and $1 0 . 5 5 ~ \mathrm { m g }$ of Bifenthrin reference standard (purity of $9 5 . 0 \%$ ) was accurately weighed and transferred into clean and dry $1 0 \mathrm { m L }$ volumetric fasks separately. The volume was made up to the mark with acetonitrile to get a primary stock solution equivalent to $1 0 0 5 . 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ and $1 0 0 2 . 3 ~ \mathrm { m g / L }$ , respectively. From this mixed working solutions ranging from 50 t ${ \cos } 0 0 ~ \mu \mathrm { g / m L }$ were prepared by serial dilutions by aspirating 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0 and $5 . 0 \mathrm { m l }$ of each stock solution in $1 0 ~ \mathrm { m L }$ volumetric fask, diluted with the mobile phase.

# Preparation of sample solution

An amount of $1 0 0 . 0 { \pm } 5 ~ \mathrm { m g }$ of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC formulation was weighed accurately into a clean and dry $1 0 \mathrm { m L }$ volumetric fask, dissolved in $2 \mathrm { m L }$ acetonitrile and made up to the mark with the mobile phase. This solution was equivalent to $1 0 0 0 ~ \mathrm { { m g / L } }$ of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin. An aliquot of $2 ~ \mathrm { m L }$ sample solutions was taken into $1 0 \mathrm { m L }$ volumetric fasks, diluted with mobile phase and made up to the mark with the mobile phase to get a solution concentration of $2 0 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ .

# Optimization of analytical method

The method was developed using Shimadzu LC2030 C Plus equipped with Auto Sampler. Initially the solubility of analytes, i.e., Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin were tested in various solvents. Then, a suitable column for separation was selected for the proposed method. To achieve a suitable separation of eluted compounds, the chromatographic conditions were optimized for parameters viz. mobile phase ratio, column temperature and fow rate as given in Table 1. Flow rate and mobile phase choice are determined based on peak parameters like tailing factors or asymmetry, run time, resolution. The Phenomenex C-18 $\mathrm { 1 5 0 ~ m m } \times 4 . 6 ~ \mathrm { m m }$ , $5 \ \mu \mathrm { m }$ particle size) column was used for separation at a column temperature of $3 0 \pm 5 ~ ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ , using acetonitrile and Milli-Q water as mobile phase. The injection volume was maintained at $1 0 \mu \mathrm { L }$ and the wavelength was set to $2 2 0 ~ \mathrm { { n m } }$ for detection using PDA detector.

# Method validation

Validation of the optimized method was done with respect to system suitability, linearity, recovery, method precision, robustness, LOD and LOQ as per SANCO/3030/99 rev. 5 guidelines. System suitability was checked by six consecutive injections of mixed standard solution of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin under optimized conditions. Linearity was achieved by plotting the graph against peak area of standard vs concentration at fve point of the analytes, i.e., pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin. Recovery was verifed by analyzing the results of known concentrations at $8 0 \%$ , $1 0 0 \%$ , $1 2 0 \%$ and $1 5 0 \%$ of claimed active ingredients [10, 11]. Method precision was performed by assessing the variability of measurements within the fve sets of samples for repeatability and intra-lab reproducibility of the results. A modifed Horwitz equation has been employed for determination of $\% { \bf R } { \bf S } { \bf D }$ of each compound as per SANCO Guidelines SANCO/3030/99 rev.5 [12]. For this the formulation of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC was weighed equally in separate volumetric fasks and each set was analyzed in triplicates. The limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantifcation (LOQ) for the optimized method was calculated by signal to noise ratio [13, 14]. The robustness of the analytical method was evaluated by making a slight change in chromatographic conditions. The measurement uncertainty of the test method was estimated using the Eurachem/CITAC guide [15–18].

Table 1 Optimization parameters (mobile phase ratio, column temperature and fow rate) of the instrument HPLC parameters   

<table><tr><td>Flow rate (mL)</td><td>Column temp ()</td><td>Mobile phase ratio (ACN: Water)</td><td>(min.)</td><td>R.T. Pyriproxyfen Area Pyriproxyfen R.T. Bifenthrin (mV.s)</td><td>(min.)</td><td>Area Bifenthrin (mV.s)</td></tr><tr><td>1.0</td><td>30</td><td>70:30</td><td>10.8</td><td>11155548</td><td>42.2</td><td>14876537</td></tr><tr><td>1.2</td><td>30</td><td>70:30</td><td>8.5</td><td>9114962</td><td>34.7</td><td>12,306,319</td></tr><tr><td>1.5</td><td>30</td><td>70:30</td><td>6.8</td><td>7297342</td><td>27.8</td><td>9851,24</td></tr><tr><td>1.2</td><td>25</td><td>70:30</td><td>8.9</td><td>9101035</td><td>37.0</td><td>12270500</td></tr><tr><td>1.2</td><td>35</td><td>70:30</td><td>8.2</td><td>9081997</td><td>32.4</td><td>12275613</td></tr><tr><td>1.2</td><td>30</td><td>75:25</td><td>6.2</td><td>9123642</td><td>20.9</td><td>12311695</td></tr><tr><td>1.2</td><td>30</td><td>85:15</td><td>3.5</td><td>8892038</td><td>8.1</td><td>12129775</td></tr><tr><td>1.2</td><td>30</td><td>80:20</td><td>4.6</td><td>9072898</td><td>12.9</td><td>12191751</td></tr></table>

# Results and discussion

# Method optimization

The $\lambda$ max of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin was determined using UV–visible spectrophotometer 1800 after the solubility check of both the analytes in diferent solvents. Acetonitrile was selected as a solvent of choice as it showed better solubility (data not shown). The $\lambda$ max in UV spectrum of Pyriproxyfen was in the range 200 to $2 2 5 \mathrm { n m }$ and for Bifenthrin in the range 205 to $2 2 0 \mathrm { n m }$ . Individual scan for $\lambda$ max in HPLC for Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin with PDA detector was also performed. The $\lambda$ max in HPLC for Pyriproxyfen was found to be $2 2 1 ~ \mathrm { { n m } }$ and for Bifenthrin it was $2 1 9 ~ \mathrm { n m }$ . The combined response of $\lambda$ max for both the analytes in HPLC using PDA detector was found at $2 2 0 \mathrm { n m }$ .

The instrumental method was optimized using several parameters using C18 Column ( $1 5 0 \ \mathrm { m m } { \times } 4 . 6 \ \mathrm { m m }$ , $5 ~ { \mu \mathrm { m } }$ particle size) with injection volume maintained at $1 0 \mu \mathrm { L }$ . Table 1 demonstrates the parameters for optimization for quantifcation of analytes in HPLC instrument. The optimized instrumental parameters were set at a wavelength of $2 2 0 ~ \mathrm { { n m } }$ for detection with mobile phase ratio of 80:20 (ACN: $\mathrm { H } _ { 2 } \mathrm { O }$ ) having a fow rate of $1 . 2 ~ \mathrm { m l }$ and column temperature set at $3 0 ~ ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ . The retention time, tailing factor and theoretical plates were found to be $4 . 6 5 2 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ , 0.936 and

3790 for Pyriproxyfen and $1 3 . 0 3 4 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ , 0.873 and 4542, respectively. The chromatogram for optimized parameters is shown in Fig. 1.

# Method validation

# System suitability

Mixed standard solution having the same concentration of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin were injected 6 times for testing system suitability parameters. The results for system suitability are as shown in Table 2 and it is concluded that system suitability parameters for both the analytes were within the acceptance criteria for theoretical plates not less than 2000; tailing factor to be not less than 2.0 and $\% { \bf R } { \bf S } { \bf D }$ not more than $2 . 0 \%$ .

# Linearity and range

Linearity is the ability to obtain experimental results which are proportional to the conc. of the analyte present in the samples within a given concentration range, either directly or by means of a well-defned mathematical transformation. The specifed range is usually derived from the linearity studies. The range of an analytical method is the upper and lower concentration (amounts) of analyte in the sample for which it has been demonstrated, and that the analytical method has suitable levels of precision, recovery and linearity. The slope demonstrates a clear correlation between response and analyte concentrations. The calibration curve was obtained by using six diferent concentrations in the range of $5 0 { - } 5 0 0 ~ \mathrm { m g / L }$ . Linearity was established by applying expression ${ \bf y } = \mathbf { m } { \bf x } + { \bf c }$ and slope was calculated. The results of linearity are shown in Table 3. The responses of both analytes were linear with correlation coefcient (r2) not less than 0.99, i.e., near to 1 which presents the excellent linearity of the pesticides in the HPLC method.

Table 2 Results for System Suitability   

<table><tr><td>Parameters</td><td>Acceptance criteria</td><td colspan="2">Results</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>Bifenthrin</td></tr><tr><td>Theoretical plates</td><td>NLT 2000</td><td>12203</td><td>20101</td></tr><tr><td>Tailing factor</td><td>NLT 2.0</td><td>1.256</td><td>1.205</td></tr><tr><td>%RSD</td><td>NMT 2.0</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.12</td></tr></table>

NLT $^ { \prime } =$ Not less than; NMT $^ { \prime } =$ Not more than

Fig. 1 HPLC chromatogram of the standard solution of $5 0 ~ \mathrm { p p m }$ showing the two peaks of Pyriproxyfen (R.T. $4 . 6 5 2 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ ) and Bifenthrin (R.T. $1 3 . 0 3 4 \mathrm { m i n } .$ ) for optimized method

# Recovery

Recovery of an analytical method was carried by standard addition method in which known amount of the analyte standard was added to known amount of sample (usually to a blank) prior to extraction, generally expressed as a percentage. As no blank formulation was available, the $1 0 \%$ EC formulation was spiked at $8 0 \%$ , $1 0 0 \%$ , $1 2 0 \%$ and $1 5 0 \%$ . For this, twelve sub-samples of pyriproxyfen $^ +$ bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC (three replicates at each spiked levels) were taken separately (concentration of $1 0 0 ~ \mathrm { { m g / L } }$ ). To this, aliquots of 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 and $4 . 0 \mathrm { m L }$ of standard solution (concentration of $5 0 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ ) were added, resulting in solutions of concentrations 160 $( 8 0 \% )$ ), 200 $( 1 0 0 \% )$ , 240 $( 1 2 0 \% )$ and 300 $( 1 5 0 \% ) \ \mathrm { m g / L }$ . The sample was homogenized by vortex for $2 \mathrm { m i n }$ . The sample extraction procedure was as per Sect. “Preparation of sample solution”. The concentration of standard solution added to the sample solution was recovered by area values of the chromatographic peak. The recovery was performed in triplicate. The mixed standard and recovery were calculated referring to the mean quantity of active substances found in each sample under investigation when compared with the label content. The results for recovery are given in Table 4. Recovery of Pyriproxyfen $( 9 9 . 4 - 1 0 5 . 0 \%$ ) and Bifenthrin $( 9 8 . 4 5 \substack { - 1 0 1 . 1 \% } )$ ) were well within the limits of $8 0 { - } 1 2 0 \%$ at each spiked level.

Table 3 Results for Linearity   

<table><tr><td></td><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>Bifenthrin</td></tr><tr><td>Regression equation</td><td>y=37416x—368376</td><td>y=54530x—645305</td></tr><tr><td>Correlation coefficient (R2)</td><td>0.9997</td><td>0.9996</td></tr><tr><td>Slope</td><td>37415.79</td><td>54529.89</td></tr><tr><td>Intercept</td><td>97379.21</td><td>165483.86</td></tr></table>

# Precision

The precision of an analytical method expresses the closeness of agreement between a series of results obtained from multiple samplings of the same sample under the same prescribed conditions. Precision was performed by assessing the variability of measurements within the fve set of samples for repeatability and intra-lab reproducibility of the results. The study was conducted with preparation of fve independent set by weighing sample for the same concentration followed by triplicate injections of each set. For this the formulation of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC weighed to about $1 0 0 \mathrm { m g }$ into separate clean and dry $1 0 ~ \mathrm { m L }$ volumetric fasks, dissolved the contents with HPLC grade acetonitrile solvent and made up to the mark with the mobile phase. These solutions were equivalent to $1 0 0 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ , respectively. An aliquot of $2 \mathrm { m L }$ sample solutions further taken into $1 0 \mathrm { m L }$ volumetric fasks, diluted with mobile phase and made up to the mark with the mobile phase. The diluted solution was equivalent to $2 0 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ . All solutions were fltered through $0 . 4 5 \mu$ membrane flter prior to use. The average value and relative standard deviation were determined for the given number of repetitions. The acceptance criterion for the relative standard deviation was determined using the modifed Horwitz equation. An estimation of the intra-laboratory repeatability (RSDr) was calculated using the modifed Horwitz equation (formula (1) and (2)).

$$
R S D _ { r } ( \% ) = R S D _ { R } ( \% ) \times 0 . 6 7
$$

where

$$
R S D _ { R } ( \% ) = 2 ^ { ( 1 - 0 . 5 l o g C ) }
$$

where C corresponds to the concentration of an analyte in the sample as a decimal fraction, RSDr represents the relative standard deviation for intra-laboratory repeatability, and $R S D _ { R }$ represents the relative standard deviation for among laboratory variations. The acceptable criterion for the relative standard deviation was determined using the modifed Horwitz equation, used as a benchmark for the performance of single analytical method (intra-laboratory) via the so-called Horrat (Horwitz ratio) value $\mathrm { H r }$ (formula (3))

Table 4 Results for recovery studies   

<table><tr><td>Sr. No #</td><td>Spiking level (w/w%)</td><td>Expected Conc. of the spiked sample (ppm)</td><td>Observed Conc. of the spiked sample (ppm)</td><td colspan="4">Recovery (%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>Bifenthrin</td><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>Bifenthrin</td><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>Bifenthrin</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>80</td><td>160.6</td><td>160.4</td><td>168.5</td><td>157.9</td><td>105.0</td><td>98.45</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>100</td><td>210.8</td><td>210.5</td><td>219.4</td><td>210.4</td><td>104.1</td><td>99.92</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>120</td><td>261.1</td><td>260.6</td><td>259.6</td><td>263.5</td><td>99.4</td><td>101.11</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>150</td><td>311.3</td><td>310.8</td><td>313.2</td><td>308.6</td><td>100.6</td><td>99.30</td></tr></table>

Signifcance of bold: Results are within the confdence intervals for $\%$ mean recovery and degree of reliability of $8 0 { - } 1 2 0 \%$

$$
\mathbf { H } _ { \mathbf { R } } = \% \mathbf { R } \mathbf { S } \mathbf { D } / \% \mathbf { R } \mathbf { S } \mathbf { D _ { r } }
$$

where $\% { \bf R } { \bf S } { \bf D }$ : obtained repeatability; $\% { \mathrm { R S D r } }$ : expected repeatability obtained with modified Horwitz equation. Precision assessed in plant protection product, i.e., the formulation of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC is given in Table 5. The $\%$ RSD obtained is within limit according to the modifed Horwitz equation (Acceptable Limit $2 . 0 1 \%$ RSD for $1 0 \%$ active content as per SANCO/3029/99 Rev.5). The obtained results also demonstrate adequacy of the proposed method for the intended application with the acceptability of the $\% { \bf R } { \bf S } { \bf D }$ results for precisions based on the Horrat value with acceptable criteria: $\mathrm { H r } \leq 1$ .

# Limit of detection and quantifcation

The limit of detection is not necessarily the value which can be determined and accepted with recovery and precision. Based on the SD of the responses $( \sigma )$ and their respective slopes (S), the LOQ and LOD are determined using the equations: $\mathrm { L O D } { = } 3 . 3 ~ \sigma / \mathrm { S }$ and $\mathrm { L O Q } = 1 0 ~ \sigma / \mathrm { S }$ . The LOD and LOQ for Pyriproxyfen are 8.6 and $2 6 . 0 \mathrm { m g / L }$ , respectively, whereas for Bifenthrin the LOD and LOQ are 10.0 and $3 0 . 3 \mathrm { m g / L }$ , respectively.

# Robustness

Robustness testing is useful to prove that typical variations made to the method are negligible in the procedure outcome. It is usually studied by making deliberate changes to critical parameters and monitor the possible alterations. Robustness was analyzed using the Youden and Steiner Test [19, 20] that permits to evaluate deliberate changes. Four analytical parameters were selected, and small variations were induced in the nominal values of the method. The parameters evaluated were fow rate $\mathrm { ( A / a ) }$ , oven temperature (B/b), Injection volume $\mathrm { ( C / c ) }$ and wavelength (D/d) at two diferent weights. The factorial combination of these analytical parameters evaluated are as in Table 6 and the analytical parameters with its variations are given in Table 7. The efect of each variation on Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin assay was evaluated using formula (4). To determine the infuence of variations of each parameter in the result, the mean of the four values corresponding to the capital letters (nominal conditions) was compared to the mean of the four values corresponding to the lowercase letters (altered conditions). For example, to evaluate the efect of fow rate in the fnal result of the analyses, the following equation was employed:

Table 5 Results for precision studies   

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Compound</td><td colspan="5">Repeatability</td><td colspan="5">Intra-lab Reproducibility</td></tr><tr><td>% Analyte</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>%RSD</td><td>%RSD</td><td>% Analyte</td><td>Mean</td><td>SD</td><td>%RSD</td><td>%RSDr</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Pyriproxyfen</td><td>10.31</td><td>10.33</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.67</td><td>2.01</td><td>10.41</td><td>10.44</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.63</td><td>2.01</td></tr><tr><td>10.26</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10.35</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10.34</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10.46</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10.44</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10.48</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10.29</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10.52</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Bifenthrin</td><td>9.87</td><td>9.91</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.95</td><td>2.01</td><td>10.08</td><td>9.97</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.94</td><td>2.01</td></tr><tr><td>9.78</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>9.85</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9.99</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>9.90</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10.01</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10.01</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9.90</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>10.02</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 6 Factorial combination of parameters according to Youden and Steiner test   

<table><tr><td>Analytical parameters</td><td colspan="8">Factorial combination</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>7</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Flow rate</td><td>A</td><td>A</td><td>A</td><td>A</td><td>a</td><td>a</td><td>a</td><td>a</td></tr><tr><td>Oven temp</td><td>B</td><td>B</td><td>b</td><td>b</td><td>B</td><td>B</td><td>b</td><td>b</td></tr><tr><td>Injection vol</td><td>C</td><td>c</td><td>C</td><td>c</td><td>C</td><td>c</td><td>C</td><td>c</td></tr><tr><td>Wavelength</td><td>D</td><td>D</td><td>d</td><td>d</td><td>d</td><td>d</td><td>D</td><td>D</td></tr><tr><td>Weight of samples</td><td>E</td><td>e</td><td>E</td><td>e</td><td>e</td><td>E</td><td>e</td><td>E</td></tr><tr><td>Result</td><td>S</td><td>t</td><td>u</td><td>v</td><td>W</td><td>x</td><td>y</td><td>z</td></tr><tr><td>Pyriproxyfen content (%)</td><td>10.6</td><td>10.9</td><td>10.2</td><td>10.6</td><td>11.5</td><td>11.2</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.1</td></tr><tr><td>Bifenthrin content (%)</td><td>10.8</td><td>11.3</td><td>11.2</td><td>11.7</td><td>12.7</td><td>12.2</td><td>12.0</td><td>11.4</td></tr></table>

Table 7 Analytical parameters and its variations for Robustness test   

<table><tr><td>Factors</td><td>Parameters</td><td>Variations</td></tr><tr><td>A,a</td><td>Flow rate</td><td>A: 1.2 (ml/min) a: 1.0 (ml/min)</td></tr><tr><td>B,b</td><td>Oven temp</td><td>B: 30 ( b: 35 ()</td></tr><tr><td>C</td><td>Injection vol</td><td>C: 10 (ml)</td></tr><tr><td>,d</td><td>Wavelength</td><td>c: 20 (ml) D: 220 (nm)</td></tr><tr><td>E,e</td><td>Weight of sample</td><td>d: 230 (nm) E: 100 (mg) e: 90 (mg)</td></tr></table>

Table 8 Robustness test results   

<table><tr><td>Parameters</td><td colspan="2">Effects</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>Bifenthrin</td></tr><tr><td>Flow rate (ml/min)</td><td>-1.33</td><td>-0.85</td></tr><tr><td>Oven temp ()</td><td>-0.41</td><td>0.17</td></tr><tr><td>Injection vol (m L)</td><td>0.15</td><td>-0.01</td></tr><tr><td>Wavelength (nm)</td><td>0.76</td><td>-0.59</td></tr><tr><td>Weight of sample (mg)</td><td>-0.46</td><td>-0.51</td></tr></table>

$$
\mathrm { a } = { \frac { s + t + u + v } { 4 } } - { \frac { w + x + y + z } { 4 } }
$$

All the peaks are clearly distinct from each other across each different condition and their assessment sequence remained consistent. The efect of each variable, standard deviation of the eight results and the criterion $\mathrm { s } \surd 2$ were calculated to evaluate the results. The standard deviation (s) value calculated for the analytical results of the eight analyses (s to z) and the criteria $\operatorname { s } { \dot { \sqrt { 2 } } }$ found to be 1.26 and 0.88 for Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin, respectively. Each variable’s efect is deemed signifcant if its values exceed the criterion $\mathrm { s } \surd 2$ , indicating that the approach is sensitive to changes in the concerned variable [21]. The obtained in Youden and Steiner’s robustness test are shown in Table 8. The results revealed that the developed method is robust, and the peaks are well separated and elute with acceptable symmetry and resolution.

# Associated analytical uncertainty

Every measurement in an analytical method is associated with a dissipation known as measurement uncertainty (MU), giving a range of values of the measured within which the true value is expected to lie. Measurement uncertainty is a key indicator of both ftness for purpose and reliability of results. Measurement uncertainty plays a critical role in demonstrating compliance and scientifc basis for an analytical procedure that it meets legal requirements. Measurement uncertainty estimations were performed according to Eurachem/CITAC guide. In the present study estimation of MUs was performed using a top-down approach. For the identifcation of the source of uncertainties, the so called “Ishikawa or fshbone diagram” as in Fig. 2 was created.

The result of analyte concentration was mainly afected by calibration curve; sample preparation and method precision (repeatability and intra-lab reproducibility). The uncertainty associated with the calibration curve $\mathsf { u } ( \mathrm { C C u v } )$ covered the uncertainties with respect to purity and weight of reference standards (uCStd) along with the dilution measurements, i.e., pipettes and volumetric fasks as these infuences the uncertainty of the reported result. The tolerance and coverage factor $\mathrm { ( k ) }$ used for pipettes and volumetric fasks was as given in their respective certifcates, along with the number of times used in the preparation of each standard solution. The uncertainty associated with the calibration curve was estimated using the regression variables and determined using the formula (5):

$$
u ( C C u \nu ) = \frac { S _ { r e s i d u a l } } { b } \sqrt { \frac { 1 } { r _ { C s } } + \frac { 1 } { n } + \frac { \left( x _ { C s } - \overline { { x } } \right) ^ { 2 } } { S x x } }
$$

where $\mathbf { S } _ { r e s i d u a l }$ is residual standard deviation of the calibration curve and derived by using formula (6):

$$
S _ { r e s i d u a l } = { \sqrt { \frac { \Sigma _ { \mathrm { { i } = 1 } } ^ { n } { \big [ } A _ { i } - ( b x \mathrm { { i } } + a ) { \big ] } ^ { 2 } } { n - 2 } } }
$$

$\operatorname { A i } =$ peak area.   
${ \bf b } = { \bf \alpha }$ slope of calibration curve.   
${ \mathrm { a } } =$ intercept of calibration curve.

$\operatorname { r c s } =$ number of repeated measurements carried out for a given sample xcs.

$\mathbf { n } =$ the total number of calibration standards used for generating calibration curve.

$\mathbf { X } \mathbf { C } \mathbf { S } =$ analyte concentration depending on chromatographic method used.

$( { \bar { \mathbf { X } } } ) =$ mean value of all the concentrations of calibration standards.

$\mathrm { x i = }$ is the target calibrator concentration at the i-th level.

Fig. 2 “Ishikawa or fshbone diagram” for identifying the sources of uncertainty in quantifcation of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin in the formulation

$\mathbf { S } \mathbf { X } \mathbf { X } =$ is the sum of squares deviation of $\mathbf { X }$ given by $\begin{array} { r } { S _ { x x } = \sum \left( x _ { i } - \overline { { x } } \right) ^ { 2 } } \end{array}$

The estimation of uncertainty associated with the method precision $\mathbf { u } ( \mathbf { S } _ { \mathrm { P r e c } } )$ with respect to repeatability and intra-lab reproducibility of the results were derived using a pooled standard deviation (Sp) approach by using formula (7):

$$
u \left( S _ { P r e c } \right) = \frac { S _ { p } } { \sqrt { r _ { c s } } }
$$

where $\mathrm { S } _ { p }$ is calculated as in formula (8):

$$
S _ { P } = \sqrt { \left( \frac { \Sigma _ { i } \left( \nu _ { i } \times s _ { i } ^ { 2 } \right) } { \left( \Sigma _ { i } \nu _ { i } \right) } \right) }
$$

vi is the degrees of freedom of the i-th sample, si is standard deviation of the i-th sample and rcs is the number sample replicates.

For uncertainty due to sample preparation (uSprep), it combines the inaccuracies of all measuring equipment (e.g., weighing balance and volumetric fasks) and a reference certifcate coverage factor of 2. The combined uncertainty, uc, is obtained by combing all the individual uncertainty components as in formula (9):

$$
\frac { u _ { c } } { x } = \sqrt { u _ { r } \big ( C _ { s t d } \big ) ^ { 2 } + u _ { r } \big ( C _ { C u r } \big ) ^ { 2 } + u _ { r } \big ( S _ { P r e c } \big ) ^ { 2 } + u _ { r } \big ( S _ { p r e p } \big ) ^ { 2 } }
$$

Finally, the expanded uncertainty (U) is calculated by multiplying the coverage factor $( k = 2 )$ at a level of confdence $9 5 \%$ by the combined uncertainty: ${ \pmb U } = { \pmb k } \times { \pmb u }$

Table 9 shows the obtained results associated with individual uncertainties of the sample preparation $( \mathrm { u } \mathrm { S } _ { p r e p } )$ , calibration standards preparation $( \mathrm { u C _ { \mathrm { s t d } } } )$ , calibration curve $( \mathrm { u C _ { C u r } ) }$ , method precision $( \mathrm { u } S _ { \mathrm { p _ { r e c } } } )$ , combined uncertainty (uc) and expanded uncertainty (U) in accordance with the EURACHEM Guide, investigated in this paper. The histogram results, as in Fig. 3, showed minimum infuence of the uncertainty obtained from sample preparation and calibration curve on the combined uncertainty for both analytes, pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin. The contribution of calibration standards and method precision showed nominal magnitude in both cases. The uncertainty value of the test method calculated for pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin were $0 . 1 5 \%$ and $0 . 1 9 \%$ w/w with a $9 5 \%$ confdence level. The proposed analytical method for the determination and quantifcation of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin in EC formulation was found to be simple, swift, linear, precise, accurate and robust. Hence, this method can be adapted for routine analysis conveniently.

# Internal quality control

Quality control parameters in an analytical laboratory refers to all of the actions, procedures, checks and decisions a laboratory must follow in the process of testing its samples. The ultimate goal is to ensure that there is integrity and accuracy of analytical results of all samples with complete reliability. Generally, label values are known which minimize the need for verifcation of pesticide identity and confrmation of quantitative results. Exceptions are cross-contaminant screening and by-product analysis where the use of ofcial (AOAC/Collaborative International Pesticides Analytical Council (CIPAC)) methodology, replicate determinations and alternative methodology (if necessary) is stressed. The sequence adopted for chromatographic methods was Blank, Calibration standard (1), Sample (A1 & A2), Calibration standard (1), Sample (B1 & B2), Calibration standard (1), Sample (C1 & C2), Calibration standard (1), Sample (D1 & D2), Calibration standard (1), Sample (E1 & E2). Thus, duplicate results are obtained for each sample and thereby averaging the values from the calibration injections which bracket them. The outlier data were calculated using Grubb’s test [22]. The $\mathrm { G } _ { \mathrm { o b s e r v e d } }$ value, i.e., 1.241 and 1.210 for pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin, respectively, is less than its $1 \%$ critical value (1.764). Hence, the values are accepted. The observations are as in Table 10 and the $Z \mathrm { - }$ scores as in Fig. 4.

Fig. 3 Histogram of uncertainties for both Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin

Table 9 Individual uncertainties in accordance with the EURACHEM Guide   

<table><tr><td>Analytes</td><td>Calibration stand- ards (uCStd)</td><td>Calibration curve (uCCuv)</td><td>Precision (uPrec)</td><td>Sample preparation (uSprep)</td><td>Combined Uncer- tainty (uc)</td><td>Expanded uncertainty (U)</td></tr><tr><td>Bifenthrin</td><td>0.00904</td><td>0.00003</td><td>0.00338</td><td>0.00045</td><td>0.0967</td><td>0.1934</td></tr><tr><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>0.00693</td><td>0.00003</td><td>0.00237</td><td>0.00045</td><td>0.0735</td><td>0.1470</td></tr></table>

Signifcance of bold: As per the decision rule result implies in compliance as it is below the control limit of the expanded uncertainty

# Conclusions

In this proposed study for simultaneous detection of Pyriproxyfen and Bifenthrin in $1 0 \%$ EC formulation, a precise, fast, simple and accurate RP-HPLC technique has been developed and validated. Further, green solvents, i.e., acetonitrile and milli-Q water, with minimal reagents use, make this method superior and suitable for various analytical applications. Statistical validation parameters and recovery data reveals high accuracy and precision of the method along with good separation and resolution of chromatographic peaks. Hence, we conclude that the method developed for simultaneous determination of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin can be used efciently by commercial laboratories for routine quality control analysis. Furthermore, estimation of measurement uncertainties associated with the analytical determination would be helpful while deciding the compliance of the results.

Fig. 4 Pictorial graph of Z-scores

Table 10 Grubbs test for outliers   

<table><tr><td></td><td>Minimum</td><td>Maximum</td><td>Mean</td><td>Std. deviation G</td><td>(Observed value)</td><td>G (Critical value) Alpha (1%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Pyriproxyfen</td><td>10.289</td><td>10.394</td><td>10.332</td><td>0.050</td><td>1.241</td><td>1.764</td><td>1.764</td></tr><tr><td>Bifenthrin</td><td>9.830</td><td>9.954</td><td>9.880</td><td>0.061</td><td>1.210</td><td>1.764</td><td>1.764</td></tr></table>

Acknowledgements We acknowledge our extended gratitude and thanks to the Management of Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi, for providing the facilities and support. We are also thankful to M/s. Parijat Industries (India) Pvt. Ltd. for providing the sufcient pesticide formulation of Pyriproxyfen $1 0 \% +$ Bifenthrin $1 0 \%$ EC and to Ms. Monica Singh for her meaningful advice. The manuscript is SRI communication # SRI-MS#20250128-01.

Author’s contribution “R.C. contributed to data curation; formal analysis; validation. R.S. contributed to methodology; investigation; validation; supervision; writing—original draft. P.P.S. contributed to visualization. M.D. contributed to supervision; writing—review and editing. All authors reviewed the manuscript.”

Funding There is no source of fnancial support to perform the work.

Data availability “Data are provided within the manuscript or supplementary information fles.”

# Declarations

Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.

# References

1. Joint FAO/IAEA (2009) Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture. and International Atomic Energy Agency., Quality control of pesticide products   
2. Skevas T, Oude Lansink AGJM, Stefanou SE (2013) Designing the emerging EU pesticide policy: a literature review, NJAS - Wageningen. J. Life Sci 64–65:95–103. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.njas.2012.09.001   
3. H. Karasali and N. Maragou (2015) Pesticides and Herbicides: Types of Pesticide, 1st ed. Elsevier Ltd., https://doi.org/10.1016/ B978-0-12-384947-2.00535-3.   
4. Knowles A (2008) Recent developments of safer formulations of agrochemicals. Environ mentalist 28(1):35–44. https://doi. org/10.1007/s10669-007-9045-4   
5. Hemadri T, Hanchinal S, Gadhanakeri S, Kodler MV, Archana P, Jituri PA (2024) Pesticide formulation testing: importance and protocols. Indian Entomol 5(1):74–80   
6. Indira Devi P, Manjula M, Bhavani RV (2022) Agrochemicals, Environment, and Human Health. Annu Rev Environ Resour 47(October):399–421. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-envir on-120920-111015   
7. ISO/IEC 17025 (2017) “INTERNATIONAL STANDARD ISO / IEC competence of testing and calibration,” Int. Organ. Stand., no. 3rd edition, pp. 1–38   
8. Hazra PADK (2019) Role of pesticide formulations for sustainable crop protection and environment management: a review. J Pharmacogn Phytochem 8(2):686–693   
9. Chaudhary R et al (2022) LC-MS/MS method for the simultaneous quantifcation of pyriproxyfen and bifenthrin and their dissipation kinetics under feld conditions in chili and brinjal. J Food Sci. https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.16070   
10. Thompson M, Ellison SLR, Wood R (2002) Harmonized guidelines for single-laboratory validation of methods of analysis (IUPAC technical report). Pure Appl Chem 74(5):835–855. https://doi.org/10.1351/pac200274050835   
11. Kelly M, DeSilva B (2007) Key elements of bioanalytical method validation for macromolecules. AAPS J 9(2):156–163. https://doi. org/10.1208/aapsj0902017   
12. European commission (EC) (2019) Directorate General Health and Consumer Protection, “Technical Active Substance and Plant protection products : Guidance for generating and reporting methods of analysis in support of pre- and post-registration data requirements for Annex (Section “Conclusions” ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 283/2013 and Annex ( Section ,” SANCO/3030/99 rev.5, no. 283, pp. 1–21   
13. T. Nageswara Rao (2018) “Validation of Analytical Methods,” in Calibration and Validation of Analytical Methods - A Sampling of Current Approaches, Intechopen, ch. 7, pp. 131–141. https:// doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72087.   
14. Kalra K (2011) “Method development and validation of analytical procedures”, in quality control of herbal medicines and related areas. Intechopen. https://doi.org/10.5772/19894   
15. S. L. R. Ellison and A. Williams (2012) “Quantifying Uncertainty in Analytical Measurement,” EURACHEM / CITAC Guid. CG 4, vol. 3rd Ed [Online]. Available: https://www.eurachem.org/ images/stories/Guides/pdf/QUAM2012_P1.pdf   
16. OIML (2010) “Evaluation of measurement data OIML G 1–100,” vol. 2008 (E).   
17. L. Prichard and V. Barwick (2003) “Preparation of Calibration Curves: A Guide to Best Practice Contact Point,” LGC/ VAM/2003/032, pp. 1–27   
18. ENFSI (2024) “Guideline for calculating measurement uncertainty in quantitative forensic Investigations,” QCC-GDL-001, pp. 1–100.   
19. W. J. Youden and E. H. Steiner (1975) “Statistical Manual of the AOAC—Association of the Ofcial Analytical Chemists,” in AOAC-I, Washington DC, p. 35.   
20. AOAC International (2013) “Guideline for Dietary Supplements and Botanical (Appendix K),”,” AOAC Of. Method Anal, pp. 8–12.   
21. Bonflio R, De Araújo MB, Salgado HRN (2011) Development and validation of an UV-derivative spectrophotometric method for determination of glimepiride in tablets. J Braz Chem Soc 22(2):292–299. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103-505320110002000 15   
22. P. Baker, P. England, N. Franklin, and K. Pavel (1989) “CIPAC COLLABORATIVE INTERNATIONAL PESTICIDES ANALYTICAL COUNCIL LIMITED Commission Internationale des Méthodes d’Analyse des Pesticides (CIMAP) CIPAC Guidelines for Collaborative Study Procedures for Assessment of Performance of Analytical Methods,”

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.