# Pesticide-Related Dermatoses

Aamir N. Hussain, Michael R. Lindberg, Michael O’Malley, Mai A. Ngo, and Howard I. Maibach

# Contents

1 Core Messages .   
2 Introduction . 3   
2.1 Pesticide Regulation . 4   
2.2 Pesticide Exposures . 4   
2.3 Pesticide-Dermatitis Surveillance . 6   
3 Pesticide-Related Dermatitis . 8   
3.1 Irritant Versus Allergic Contact Dermatitis . 8   
3.2 Tests of Irritation and Sensitization . 10   
3.3 Predictive Tests for Delayed Allergy . 10   
3.4 Dermal Manifestation of Systemic Absorption . 13   
4 Antimicrobials . 13   
4.1 Terpene Compounds . 16   
4.2 Isothiazoline Compounds . 16   
5 Fumigants . . 1 7   
6 Fungicides . 18   
6.1 Inorganic Compounds . 19   
6.2 Phthalimide Compounds . 19   
6.3 Thiocarbamate Compounds . 2 0   
6.4 Ergosterol Synthesis Inhibitors . 20   
6.5 Miscellaneous Fungicides . 20   
7 Herbicides . 21   
7.1 Bipyridyl Compounds . 21   
7.2 Plant Growth Promoters and Inhibitors . 23   
8 Insecticides . 2 3   
8.1 Inorganic and Organometallic Insecticides . 25   
8.2 Kerosene, Petroleum Distillates, and Other Solvents . 26   
8.3 Organophosphates . 26   
8.4 Carbamates . . 2 7   
8.5 Insect Repellants . 2 7   
9 Conclusion . 27   
References . 27

# Abstract

Pesticides include chemicals as well as biological and physical agents used to control a diverse array of pests. Although a number of occupational and non-occupational situations affect the extent and route of exposure to pesticides, most skin effects are associated with a relatively small number of compounds. The highest exposures and risk of dermatitis involve individuals employed in agricultural pest control operations. The degree of pesticide contact may be lessened by use of protective clothing and engineering controls such as closed mixing and loading systems.

For evaluating the effects of pesticides on the skin, the most relevant tests include dermal absorption tests, the 72 hr. Draize dermal irritation study, and sensitization studies. For the Draize irritancy test, a general protocol utilizing albino rabbits is provided. Suggested concentrations are also given for sensitization studies using the patch test methodology.

Registries for monitoring pesticide-related illness exist in numerous US and worldwide jurisdictions. The most complete historical data derive from the California Pesticide Illness

Surveillance Program. This chapter briefly presents data on illnesses associated with individual classes of pesticides and pesticide mixtures, discussed separately as five categories (antimicrobials, fumigants, fungicides, herbicides, and insecticides), focusing on the principal causes of pesticide dermatitis reported in medical literature and in California use and surveillance data between 1982 and 2014.

# Keywords

Pesticide $\cdot$ Agrochemical $\cdot$ Agriculture · Exposure $\cdot$ Dermatitis $\cdot$ Sensitization $\cdot$ Allergy/ allergic $\cdot$ Irritant $\cdot$ Contact $\cdot$ ACD $\cdot$ ICD · Antimicrobial $\cdot$ Insecticide $\cdot$ Fumigant $\cdot$ Fungicide $\cdot$ Herbicide $\cdot$ Patch test

# Core Messages

• Pesticide-related dermatoses are a significant problem in the agricultural industry. Agricultural workers contact pesticides, other chemical irritants, and potential allergens doing any number of farm-related activities.

• The two major types of contact dermatitis, irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) and allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), may be differentiated by diagnostic patch testing. A list of suggested patch test concentrations and vehicles for common pesticides suspected to be allergens is provided.

# 2 Introduction

Pesticides include chemicals as well as biological and physical agents used to control a diverse array of pests. As of 2024, the state of California has registered 1057 pesticide active ingredients (AIs) formulated into 13,071 separate products, including adjuvants and antimicrobial compounds (DPR 2024). Adjuvants must be registered as pesticides in California but are exempt from federal registration requirements. Both state and federal regulatory agencies classify antimicrobial compounds as pesticides, although many clinicians do not naturally regard them as such.

The most recent U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) report on pesticide sales and usage (U.S. EPA 2024), based on data sources for 2008 and 2012, estimated annual world pesticide usage totaling nearly 6 billion pounds in 2012, with herbicides accounting for almost half of global usage, followed by fumigants, insecticides, and fungicides. Pesticide use in the USA totaled over 1 billion pounds in 2012 (Table 1). The survey did not include antimicrobial agents, which historically accounts for half of the pesticides sold and taxed in California (980,637,605 pounds, based on 2015 sales data) (DPR 2015a). If antimicrobial use in California can be extrapolated to account for a similar proportion of the USA, the national total would be more than 2 billion pounds annually.

The long list of pesticide agents can best be understood by grouping them into target pest or use categories and then by chemical structure (Table 2). Most skin effects of pesticides are associated with a relatively small number of compounds. These include the fumigant compounds (metam-sodium and methyl bromide), selected fungicides (conazoles, phthalimide, thiocarbamate, copper salts, elemental sulfur, organotins, naphthenate salts, and halogenated nitrile benzene compounds), halogenated organophosphates (dichlorvos and naled), pyrethroids, and bipyridyl herbicides.

Table 1 Amount of pesticide active ingredient used by pesticide type   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Year andpesticidetype</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Worldmarket(billionpounds)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>US market(billionpounds)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>US %worldmarket</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2006</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicidesa</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2.018</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.498</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.955</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.099</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fungicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.519</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.073</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Otherb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.705</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.457</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>27</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Total</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5.197</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.127</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2009</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicidesa</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2.189</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.498</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.016</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.099</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fungicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.784</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.073</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fumigants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.019</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.457</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>27</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Totalc</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5.008</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.127</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2012</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicidesa</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2.847</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.678</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>24</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.065</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.064</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fungicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.799</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.105</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fumigants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.110</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.435</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>39</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Totalc</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5.821</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1.182</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>20</td></tr></table>

Nevertheless, in field investigations of current pesticide illness episodes, compounds with novel chemical structures and different modes of action are sometimes implicated. These novel pesticide groups may be unfamiliar to many clinicians. Many of these compounds have selective or relatively selective modes of action and a very limited number of illness reports and no indication that they cause dermatitis (Table 3). For example, the compound spinosad (Kirst 2010) fits this safety profile. As a selective nicotine receptor inhibitor, spinosad was initially registered for turf and ornamental crops in 1997, but now has agricultural uses. Also, the chitin synthesis inhibitor novaluron, initially registered in 2008, has a low overall mammalian toxicity and negative tests for dermal irritation and sensitivity.

Table 2 Active ingredients of pesticides registered in California, July 2017   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Use category</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1># of AIs</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Structural categories</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Antimicrobial bactericidedisinfectant virucide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>21321517273</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Alcohol, isothiazilone (Kathon) compounds, thiocarbamate salts, phenols,quaternary ammonium, aldehydes, carboxylic acid, chlorine, chlorinereleasers, biological preparations, calcium salts, epoxides, coppercompounds, iodines, hydantoin compounds, peroxides, silver compounds,bromide salts, silicates, morpholine derivatives, organotin compounds,chelating agents, bacteriophages</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Avicide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pyrimidinol, chloro-toluidine, aminopyridine</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fumigant</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Halonitromethane, low molecular weight halogenated hydrocarbons,phosphine, phosphine releasers, MITC releasers</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fungicide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>316</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Carbamate, phthalimido compounds, thiocarbamate, biological agents</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>186</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Triazines, thiocarbamates, bipiridyls, pyridinecarboxylic acid, acetanilide,amide, ammonium salt, urea compounds, thiourea compounds, arseniccompounds, sulfonamide, biological, boron, phenoxy compounds,cyclohexanedione, dimethoxypyrimidine, dintiroanilines, imidazolinone</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insecticide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>258</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Organophosphate, carbamates, pyrethrins/pyrethroids, biological,pyrethroids</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insect growth regulator</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>44</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methoprene analogs</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Molluscicide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>33</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aldehydes</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Nematicide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Biological, phosphonothionate, biological</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Plant growth regulator</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>55</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Triazol, acetamide, alkyl ammonium, vinylglycine, fatty acid, fluorenederivative, furan derivative, hexadione, hydrazide, indole derivative,inorganic cyanamide, phenylamine,phenylurea, phosphonic acid,piperidinium, pyrimidine, low molecular weight unsaturated organiccompound, naphthalene derivative</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Repellent</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>77</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Plant oil extracts, isothiocyanates, mercaptans, ammonium derivatives,coyote and fox urine granules, ketones, piperidine, egg proteins, toluamidederivatives, biological oils</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Vertebrate control</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>37</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Warfarin derivative, phosphide salt, biological alkaloid, cyanide salt,vitamin D derivative, inorganic nitrate salt, rotenone, anthranilate</td></tr></table>

# 2.1 Pesticide Regulation

Pesticides are regulated differently from other chemicals in the USA. Prior to the enactment of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) in 1970, there was little regulation and testing of pesticides in the USA. Since the enactment of FIFRA, the U.S. EPA has applied an increasingly strict testing scheme to registration for sale and use of pesticides. The data required by the U.S. EPA for registration of a pesticide include product chemistry, environmental fate, acute and chronic toxicology, and studies of hazards to nontarget organisms.

Pesticide materials tested in animal studies may include pure AI, technical grade AI, or individual product formulations. Solvents, surfactants, and preservatives in product formulations may affect the results of both irritation and sensitization tests in animals. This observation parallels clinical experience with patch testing showing paraben and other preservatives as the underlying cause of sensitization for many different commercial products.

# 2.2 Pesticide Exposures

Table 4 lists a variety of occupational and non-occupational situations that affect the extent and route of exposure to pesticides. The vapor pressure and other physicochemical properties (especially photoreactivity and photostability, which can be of significance for photopatch testing) of individual compounds also affect the degree of inhalation or skin contact. For compounds that may cause systemic allergy or other generalized skin eruptions, the degree of dermal absorption is also important. A high percentage of pesticides are absorbed across intact human skin because of a combination of relatively low molecular weight and high lipid solubility. This correlates with the requirement for many of these compounds to be absorbed through the protective coverings of insects or plants.

Table 3 New/selective pesticide chemistry   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chemical category: mechanism of action</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dermal irritation/sensitization; illness data for typicalcompound(s)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pheromones, biological insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>(S)-verbenone—Bark beetle antiaggregation pheromone;94.8% concentration, nonirritant in the Draize assay,sensitizer in the Buehler Guinea pig test; registered in 2012,no reported illnesses</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insect growth regulators (mimicking natural juvenilehormone)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methoprene—Animal irritation studies show reversal(moderate-minimal) irritation; no cases associated withisolated exposure to methoprene were reported since initialregistration in the 1980s</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Neonicotinoids (differential effect oninsect vs. mammalian nicotine receptors)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Imidacloprid—Minimal irritation in animal studies;nonsensitizer in Buehler test, GPMT; five illnesses reportedsince initial registration 1998, including 2 cases followingdirect accidental contact</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chitin synthesis inhibitors</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Novaluron—a category IV (minimal) irritant in Draize test;nonsensitizer in Buehler test; no illnesses reported sinceinitial registration 2006</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Tetronic acid inhibitors (inhibits lipid synthesis)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Spirotetramat—One possible case, with only indirectcontact, reported since initial registration in 2008</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ryanodine receptor modulators (differential effect oninsect muscle receptor)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chlorantraniliprole—96.5% technical material nonirritant inDraize test; nonsensitizer in the GPMT; no reported illnesssince initial registration in 2008</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Spinosyns (selective nicotine receptor binders,extracted from Saccaropolyspora spinosa and semi-synthetic derivatives)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Spinosad—Negative irritation and sensitization studies;limited illness reported in 19 years of use</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Triazine insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pymetrozine—Mode of action not definitively known; 50%wettable granule minimal irritant</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fungicides</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Benzamidoximes (inhibit fungal colony formation)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cyflufenamid—10% suspension minimal irritant, negative inGPMT; no reported illnesses since initial registration in 2012</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Biologicals</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pseudomonas syringae—Minimal irritant in Draize test; nosensitization studies</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Carboxamide (selectively concentrates in fungal cells;inhibits succinic dehydrogenase)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Iprodione—75% granules moderate irritant; three liquids,(23% AI, 41.6% AI, 19% iprodione-20.4% thiophanate-methyl), 50% granular product caused minimal irritation;dermatitis cases with direct accidental exposure</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Strobilurin (inhibits fungal mitochondrial respiration)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Azoxystrobin—Category IV (minimal) irritant in Draizetest; nonsensitizer in Buehler test; limited illness reports</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicides</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Carotenoid synthesis inhibitors</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Norflurazon—5% granules, 99.6% solid minimal irritants;nonsensitizer in LLNA; one possible case of dermatitis;sensitization reported since registration in the 1980s</td></tr></table>

The highest exposures and risk of dermatitis involve individuals employed in agricultural pest control operations: mixing, loading, applying, and flagging. These workers are often grouped under the category of “pesticide handlers.” Mixers and loaders may handle concentrated pesticides in large volumes. The degree of contact may be lessened by use of protective clothing and equipment, closed mixing and loading systems, or use of water-soluble bags. Exposure to applicators varies with the type of application, from backpack sprayers to enclosed-cab vehicles with filtered cooled air. Leaking or poorly maintained equipment may fail, resulting in overexposures with any type of application device.

Table 4 Points in pesticide processing or use resulting in potential exposure   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Activity/process</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Potential exposure situation</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Research and development</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Accidental release of materials during synthesis or during analytical measurements</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Manufacturing andformulation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Technical grade material produced in enclosed and semi-enclosed operations;exposures during leaks/spill and process repairs—Packaging operations vary indegree of enclosure; technical grade material mixed with &quot;inert&quot; ingredients such assolvents, and adjuvants</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Transportation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Small- to moderate-volume spills associated with highway transport, potentially largevolume spills associated with bulk rail transport; fumigation in transit (rail orshipping)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pesticide handling</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Mixing: Commercial material diluted with water or other materialLoading: Into tanks in planes, ground rigs, backpacks, or hand-held sprayers. Closedversus open mix/loading systemsFlagging: Standing at the end of fields to mark the rows to be sprayed by crop-dustingaircraft. Flagging is currently being replaced by global positioning system (GPS)flagging in some operations</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Agriculture-related work</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Field workers, pickers, sorters, packers, and others who come into contact withpesticide residues on leaves and fruitHigh-contact work tasks include hand labor in grapes; picking row crops, such aslettuce or strawberries, results in markedly less contact—As described in results ofresidue transfer studies</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Emergency response andmedical workers</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Exposure to contaminated persons and equipment in the process of responding tospills, accidents, and poisonings</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Environmental and consumerexposures</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Spills and accidents, especially ingestion by children (floor level materials—Anttraps, etc.), suicide and homicideHome use: House and gardenStructural use: Residents and occupants of buildings bystanders, early reentry intoor failure to clear fumigated buildingsContamination: Food, water, airAgriculture-urban interface (e.g., pesticide drift)</td></tr></table>

Exposures in most manufacturing facilities are low owing to the use of automated closed systems. Extensive contact with contaminated equipment may be involved during unscheduled maintenance such as with breakdowns or leaks. In production facilities, exposures may be much higher if dusts, powders, or granules are processed in open systems.

Issues arise in the agricultural work environments that do not occur in the industrial setting because of the widely scattered seasonal labor force. Hazards are transient and may be difficult to evaluate after the fact. For the workers, supervisors, and ranch operators living on farm properties, there is also a very limited division between work and living space. Unexpected hazards include intermittent presence of pesticide residues or pesticide application equipment in children’s play areas or exposures due to pesticide drift (where airborne pesticide applications to one field may inadvertently disperse to adjacent fields or residential areas), and accidental intrusion of soil-applied nematicides and fumigants into well water. Pesticide levels in house dust have also been associated with the “take home” exposure scenario where pesticide residues are transferred from the workplace to home via work clothing, shoes, vehicles, and tools.

# 2.3 Pesticide-Dermatitis Surveillance

Registries for monitoring pesticide-related illness exist in numerous US (NIOSH 2017) and worldwide jurisdictions. The most complete historical data derive from the California Pesticide Illness Surveillance Program (PISP). The registry began as collections of newspaper clippings in the 1930s. It was operated by the California Department of Food and Agriculture beginning in the 1970s and has been operated by the California Environmental Protection Agency since 1991. The electronic database in its current form dates to 1992. Data collected between 1982 and 1991 are still available electronically but have not been completely re-coded according to the current system. Data for this time period serve as a valuable reference point for evaluating dermatitis trends. Several large-scale episodes have also proved important in understanding the role of slow environmental dissipation for key irritant materials causing dermatitis in field workers (Smith 1991; Saunders et al. 1987; O’Malley et al. 1990).

Other US states registering pesticide illnesses currently include Washington, Florida, Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, Michigan, Nebraska, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Texas, and Washington (NIOSH 2017). The largest volume of cases, approximately 100 annually, come from Texas and Washington. Specific data on skin effects are not presented in the summary data available.

The completeness of illness reporting has been controversial. Underreporting may be especially frequent for skin reactions that do not result in time lost from work. Grouping of cases in clusters, on the other hand, demonstrably increases illness reporting in the affected group. Interviewing coworkers of an index case in a group with similar exposures typically reveal cases who never sought treatment. It is unknown whether factors affecting reporting have significantly changed over time, accounting for apparent variations in population incidence.

Figure 1 shows trends in cases of pesticiderelated dermatitis reported in California between 1982 and 2014. There were a total of 9763 cases reported in that interval. During the mid-1980s, episodes of dermatitis in agricultural workers accounted for 300–400 cases annually but have accounted for 100 or fewer cases in the years since 2000. Possible explanations for the decreasing number of cases since 2000 include changes in pesticide regulations, pesticide use, work practices, and illness reporting.

Fig. 1 Pesticide dermatitis cases in California 1982–2014

Fig. 2 Propargite and sulfur use in California 1990–2015

Clusters identified by assigned reference case numbers accounted for $2 5 \%$ of the total cases. Years with unusually high-percentage cluster cases included 1986 (122 cases in orange harvesters associated with propargite residue), 1988 (47 cases in nectarine harvesters also associated with propargite), and 1991 (100 cases in workers cleaning up a metam-sodium spill in the Sacramento River).

A 1980s requirement for formulation of propargite in water-soluble bags had a definite impact on the number of cases of eye irritation and dermatitis in mixing and loading operations. The long re-entry interval for propargite set in the early 1990s provides an example of a regulation, possibly accounting for the subsequent decline in large-scale field residue dermatitis episodes (refer to examples above). An episode did subsequently occur in 1995, but may have been caused by an over-application of the AI. Overall use of propargite has declined since the 1990s but did not decline significantly until many years after the long re-entry interval took effect. The long re-entry time may have impacted the timing of work practices, so that exposure was limited to performing hand-labor tasks prior to application rather than afterward. Over the same period, use of sulfur changed only slightly (Fig. 2).

A gradual increase in the percentage of agricultural workers employed by farm labor contractors (as opposed to being directly employed by growing operations) has been noted in California since the 1980s (Fig. 3). It is conjectured that this arrangement may discourage reporting of workrelated illnesses and injuries. Episodes of retaliation against employees making workers’ compensation claims make this seem plausible, but it is difficult to ascertain how frequently this may occur. The overall low percentage of farmworkers with employer-provided health insurance means many seek care at overburdened safety-net clinics. The lack of routine access to care may also decrease the likelihood of seeking treatment for workplace injuries and illnesses.

# 3 Pesticide-Related Dermatitis

The following sections briefly present data on illnesses associated with individual classes of pesticides and pesticide mixtures, discussed separately as five categories: antimicrobials, fumigants, fungicides, herbicides, and insecticides.

# 3.1 Irritant Versus Allergic Contact Dermatitis

Surveillance data do not inherently distinguish between allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) and irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) or other skin effects of pesticides. However, since allergic dermatitis is characteristically idiosyncratic, clusters usually involve irritant dermatitis affecting a group of field workers performing a common work task. Most dermatitis cases in pesticide handlers are probably also due to irritation, but occur singly and may require diagnostic patch testing to rule out ACD in some circumstances. ICD is also known to predispose patients to developing ACD (Nosbaum et al. 2009).

Fig. 3 Farm labor contractor (FLC) employment as a percentage of total California agricultural Employment 1991–2016

ICD is a nonimmunological reaction caused by direct damage to the skin following exposure to an agrochemical or other harmful agent. Immune response and resulting inflammation is secondary to the cutaneous damage. Some agents do cause subjective skin symptoms while producing minimal inflammation by stimulating the cutaneous nerves. Corrosive substances, such as strong acids and alkalis, are examples of immediate irritants that produce skin damage within minutes or hours of exposure. Cumulative irritation is more subtle, resulting from exposure to an inherently less irritating material or a dilute concentration of a severely irritating or corrosive substance. Because of the delay between initial contact and the subsequent response, the specific cause of cumulative irritation may prove difficult to recognize.

With ACD, an immunological reaction is triggered by dermal contact to a skin allergen. After sensitization, subsequent exposures may elicit an immunological reaction. This response may occur at the site of contact but may also occur systemically. Once individuals are sensitized to a pesticide, exposure to even minute amounts of the chemical may cause a reaction.

Clinical history and examination can provide some help in differentiating ICD and ACD. Common reaction patterns and primary morphologies of pesticide contact dermatitis include papules, plaques, macules, patches, vesiculobullous, as well as nail plate changes. The nails in particular are frequently affected (likely due to handling of the chemicals) and include nail discoloration, onycholysis, and other nail dystrophies. (Febriana et al. 2023). Secondary changes such as fissuring, ulceration, as well as post-inflammatory pigmentary changes do occur. Like all inflammatory dermatoses, particular attention should be given to patients with skin of color as pigmentary changes are frequent and more pronounced. When clinical symptoms and findings overlap between ICD and ACD, patch testing is often useful and may also identify confounding allergies to plants or protein contact dermatitis. Penagos et al. (2004) have emphasized the need to test agricultural workers with specific pesticide patch test series. California illness registry records seldom contain information about testing with either the standard patch test series or specific pesticide or plant allergens. Exceptions included occasional published case reports (Dannaker et al. 1993) or patch test studies of reported cases (O’Malley et al. 1995) and a patch test performed by a rural dermatologist.

One of the key problems that became apparent as patch testing proliferated was that different investigators were using different concentrations, vehicles, and, in some cases, chemicals to detect a given allergy. In recognition of the need to standardize patch testing, the Scandinavian Committee for Standardization of Routine Patch Testing was created in 1962. The International Contact Dermatitis Research Group (ICDRG) was later formed in 1967, followed by the North American Contact Dermatitis Group (NACDG), which was modeled after the ICDRG. By patch testing using standardized procedures with the same screening allergens, long-term trends in patch test reactions may be analyzed. Lachapelle (1997) produced an original coding system $\mathrm { ~  ~ { ~ \cal ~ O ~ } ~ } = \mathrm { ~  ~ n o ~ }$ relevance/not traced, $1 =$ doubtful relevance, $2 =$ possible relevance, $3 =$ likely relevance) for recording clinical results of patch tests, grading relevance to the current and past clinical condition of tested patients. The Lachapelle coding system may prove helpful in reviewing results of patch testing series involving exposed workers with no current skin condition but a history of prior occupational exposure (O’Malley et al. 1995; Verma et al. 2007; Sharma and Kaur 1990). Positive test results in these cases would be graded as having no current relevance, but possible past relevance. In typical case reports, positive reactions have obvious current relevance (Dannaker et al. 1993).

# 3.2 Tests of Irritation and Sensitization

For evaluating the effects of pesticides on the skin, the most relevant tests include dermal absorption tests, the $^ { 7 2 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ . Draize dermal irritation study, and sensitization studies. For the Draize irritancy test, a general protocol utilizing albino rabbits is as follows (O’Malley 2010). A single dose of the technical material with detailed characterization of contaminants, or an end-use product, is applied to the skin of one or several experimental animals (depending on the possibility of a corrosive reaction) for $^ { 4 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ . Solid materials are moistened with distilled water, saline, or other vehicle at the time of application. The irritation is scored at intervals until the irritation has resolved or is considered permanent. Materials are categorized based on scores at $^ { 7 2 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ and persistence of irritation for more than 14 days (Table 5). For sensitization using the patch test methodology, suggested concentrations are shown in Table 6.

Table 5 Draize irritation test categories   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Description</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Category</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dermal irritationscorea</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Corrosive</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>I</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>&gt;1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Severe irritant</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>I</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5-7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Moderatelyirritant</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>III</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2-5</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Minimallyirritantb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>IV</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0-2</td></tr></table>

a Measured at $^ { 7 2 \mathrm { h } }$ b May be divided into compounds that produce no irritation (nonirritants) and those that produce transient, mild irritation

The U.S. EPA requires the signal word “Danger” for formulations scored as corrosive in the Draize test, “Warning” for those scored as severe irritants, and “Caution” for those scored as moderate or minimally irritant. The U.S. EPA does not require changes in the label signal word for formulations that cause sensitization in predictive testing but does require use of appropriate cautionary statements (e.g., “Prolonged or frequently repeated skin contact may cause allergic reactions in some individuals”) (U.S. EPA 2013). Interpretation of predictive irritation tests proves simplest for directly corrosive or highly irritant materials. Materials scored as minimally irritant may seem relatively innocuous, but can still produce significant shortterm reactions with accidental direct exposure.

# 3.3 Predictive Tests for Delayed Allergy

Approved predictive tests for delayed allergy include methods that induce sensitization with epicutaneous application of test material (Buehler closed patch test, open epicutaneous test) and two that employ intradermal induction (the guinea pig maximization test and Freund’s complete adjuvant test). All four tests use visual scoring of relative degrees of erythema over the course of

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>Table 6 Suggested patch test concentrationsa</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>AI/use or structural category</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>CAS #</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Concentration (%)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Vehicle</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Antimicrobials and antibiotics</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methylchloroisothiazolinone-methylisothiazolinone (Kathon CG)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2682-20-4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.005-0.01</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Benzisothiazoline</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2634-33-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Formaldehyde (formalin—40% solution)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>50-00-0</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Glutaraldehyde</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>111-30-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Benzalkonium chloride</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8001-54-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Sodium hypochlorite</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10022-70-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumAqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Hexahydro 1,3,5,tris (2-hydroxyethyl) triazine(Grotan)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4719-04-4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fumigants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chloropicrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>76-06-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dazomet</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>533-74-4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.10.0250.0025</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumVaseline</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Metam-sodium</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>137-42-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1,2-Dichloropropane</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>78-87-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1,2,5, 10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>D-D mixture (dichloropropene anddichloropropane); dichloropropenes</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>26952-23-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.05</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>FungicidesPhthalimide compounds</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Captafol (Difolatan)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2939-80-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.050.1, 11,5,10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumAqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Captan</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>133-06-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Thiocarbamates</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Maneb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12427-38-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Zineb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12122-67-7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ziram</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>137-30-4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Other fungicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Benomyl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>17804-35-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.11.0Undiluted anddiluted 1:5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatumor waterPPetrolatumOlive oil</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dimethyl fumarateb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>624-49-7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.01</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PCNB (pentachloronitrobenzene)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>82-68-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>110</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumButanolaqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dichloronitroaniline</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6641-64-1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Butanol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chlorothalonil</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1897-45-6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.0010.010.005-0.0001</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ButanolAcetoneaqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Imazalil</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>35554-44-0</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Vaseline</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Sulfur</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7704-34-9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>15-20</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ButanolAlcohol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2,4-D</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>94-75-7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Alachlor (Lasso)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>15972-60-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Atrazine</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1912-24-9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Thiobencarb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>28249-77-6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>ued)</td></tr></table>

(continued)

Table 6 (continued)   

<table><tr><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>CAS #</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Concentration (7)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>velicle</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Diquat</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>85-00-7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Paraquat</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1910-42-5 (dichloride)2074-50-2(dimethylsulfate)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Glyphosate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1071-83-6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>101, 5 (end usefoomulation)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>AqueousAqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>InsecticidesOrganophosphates</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Acephate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>30560-19-1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Butanol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chlorpyrifos</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2921-88-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Butanol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Diazinon</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>333-41-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ButanolPetrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dichlorvos (DDVP)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>62-73-7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.021</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>AqueousPetrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dimethoate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>60-51-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>111-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumAlcoholOillAqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Malathion</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>121-75-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Butanol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Naled</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>300-76-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.010.5 (technical)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumAqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>N-methyl-carbamates</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methomyl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16752-77-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.50.2% (a.i)1% (formulatedproduct)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumAqueousAqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Carbaryl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>63-25-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Carbaryl 50%</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Vaseline</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methiocarb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2032-65-7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.5, 1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pyrethroids/pyrethrins</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Allethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>584-79-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cypermcthrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>52315-07-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Deltamethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>52918-63-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fenvalerate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>51630-58-1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Permethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>52645-53-1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PetrolatumButanol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Resmethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10453-86-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pyrethrum</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8003-34-7 (powder)121-21-1 (pyrethrins,pyrethrum oleoresin)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Terpene compounds</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Linalool</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>78-70-6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Limonene</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5989-27-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pine Tard</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8011-48-1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Petrolatum</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Miscellaneous insecticides, insecticide repellants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fenbutatin oxide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13356-08-6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Butanol</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Nicotine</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>54-11-5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1,5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aqueous</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>(continued)</td></tr></table>

(continued)

Table 6 (continued)   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>AI/use or structural category</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>CAS #</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Concentration (%)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Vehicle</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Propargite</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2312-35-8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.5-1.02.5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>AqueousNotspecified</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>DEET (diethyl toluamide)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>134-62-3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ethanol/petrolatum</td></tr></table>

a Taken from Penagos et al. (2000) b Concentrations from Silvestre et al. (2010) and Lammintausta et al. (2010) c Concentrations from Schubert et al. (2023) and Barbaud et al. (2023) d Concentrations from Barbaud et al. (2013)

the test. The local lymph node assay uses epicutaneous induction but is scored based on activation of regional lymph nodes (measured by radioactive thymidine uptake).

# 3.4 Dermal Manifestation of Systemic Absorption

Typified by the cholinesterase inhibitors, many dermally absorbed pesticides have systemic effects. In relatively few cases, the systemic effects manifest themselves with skin eruptions. Examples include urticaria or drug-like eruptions resulting from absorbed AIs or their metabolites. Notable examples are organophosphates that cause both contact irritation and cholinesterase irritation (Mathias 1983).

result from disinfectants used to clean equipment or directly on udders prior to milking. Equipment disinfectants include sodium hydroxide and nitric acid. Dairy farmers are also exposed to hypochlorite iodine, phenolic compounds, and quaternary ammonium compounds. Preservative solutions for milk sample analysis in the UK have contained $8 \%$ bronopol and $20 \%$ methyl-chloroisothiazoline and methylisothiazoline or methyisothiazolinone (KathonR CG), with antibacterial and fungicidal properties. Bronopol is currently registered in California and the USA as an antimicrobial, fungicide, and algaecide/slimicide. Primarily used as a preservative and a microbiocide in the processing of industrial water, it has also been used in seed treatment and foliar spray in some countries. ACDs have been identified in workers exposed to bronopol and KathonR CG as milk preservatives.

# 4 Antimicrobials

The compounds discussed below account for a substantial portion of all reported cases of dermatitis associated with antimicrobials. Frequently reported classes of antimicrobials included quaternary ammonium compounds, isothiazoline (Kathon) compounds, chlorine and hypochlorites, the chlorine releaser cyanuric acid, glutaraldehyde, phenolic disinfectants, pine oil, and creosote (Table 7). All of the agents have the capacity to cause significant irritation or corrosion. Glutaraldehyde, the isothiazioline compounds, and quaternary ammonium compounds, as discussed below, can also cause sensitization.

Dairy workers typify the risk antimicrobials may pose to agricultural workers. ICD or ACD may

Quaternary ammonium compounds (quaternary ammonium salts) or “Quats” contain a central nitrogen with two short-chain (usually methyl or ethyl) and long-chain alkyl groups of varying length substituted for the hydrogens in the ammonium atom. Commercial products contain mixtures of multiple compounds. The variation in chain length affects the activity against specific bacterial or viral pathogens (Anderson et al. 2016).

The 1982–2014 registry data showed 499 reported cases of dermatitis associated with quaternary ammonium compounds (grouping all registered products) and an additional 148 involving mixtures of quaternary ammonium compounds with other products. The large majority affected those directly handling the products. A total of 408 of the quats cases involved only dermatitis; 52 involved skin and eye symptoms;

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=7>Taaspeceelate0eleialanticieeiinsecticides</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Active ingredient</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Total</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Handler</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fieldworker</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Emergencyresponders</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Packaging/processing</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Other</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Antimicrobials</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Quaternary ammonium</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>499</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>429</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>69</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Isothiazoline disinfectants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>35</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>27</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Glutaraldehyde</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>85</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>72</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Creosote</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>89</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>40</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>15</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>33</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pine oil</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>19</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Phenolic disinfectants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>87</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>71</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Hypochlorite</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>836</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>512</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>51</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>266</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cyanuric acid</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>84</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>68</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chlorine</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>100</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>15</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>46</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>37</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fumigants</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1,3-Dichloropropene</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dazomet</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ethylene dibromide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methyl bromide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>83</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>69</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chloropicrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Metam-sodium, potassium</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>277</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>72</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>179</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ethylene oxide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methyl iodide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fungicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Anilazine</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Azoyxstrobin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Benomyl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>21</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Copper compounds</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>52</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>17</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Captafol</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Captan</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>41</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Imazalil</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chlorothalonil</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>53</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>21</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dicloran</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>PCNB(pentachloronitrobenzene)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Lime-sulfur</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Sulfur</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>564</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>95</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>281</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>182</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Mancozeb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>27</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>23</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Maneb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Thiram</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Zineb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ziram</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Herbicides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2,4-D</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dinoseb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>18</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Diquat</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>34</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Paraquat</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>38</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>33</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>EPTC</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ethephon</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fluazifop-butyl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr></table>

(continued)

Table 7 (continued)   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Active ingredient</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Total</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Handler</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fieldworker</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Emergencyresponders</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Packaging/processing</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Other</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Glyphosate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>292</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>255</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>35</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Hydrogen cyanamide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pentachlorophenol</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Trifluralin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Insecticides</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Abamectin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Potassium salts of fatty acids</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Bacillus thuringiensis</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Bendiocarb</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>15</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Spinosad</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Carbaryl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>32</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Methomyl</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>20</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Propoxur</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Acephate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Chlorpyrifos</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>125</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>27</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>67</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Diazinon</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>56</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>18</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dichlorvos, DDVP</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dimethoate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Malathion</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>41</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>17</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>23</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Naled</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>18</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pyrethrins</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Bifenthrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Lambda cyhalothrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>38</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>21</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cyfluthrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>59</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>20</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>27</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cypermethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>39</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>22</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Deltamethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Esfenvalerate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fenvalerate</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Permethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>37</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>18</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Resmethrin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Propargite</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>338</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>94</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>203</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>41</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Fenbutatin-oxide</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dienochlor</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>5</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Dicofol</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>11</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Endosulfan</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>15</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>8</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cyhexatin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Cryolite</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>10</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>DEET</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Capsaicin</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>16</td></tr></table>

and the remaining 39 cases involved dermatitis and respiratory or systemic symptoms.

Numerous animal and human studies have shown skin irritation and sensitization to quats. Animal studies on quaternary ammonium compounds show that concentrations greater than $5 \%$ can cause irritation in the Draize assay. Occupational allergic contact dermatitis from 2,3-epoxypropyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (EPTMAC) and Kathon LX have been reported. Positive patch test reactions to various quats have been reported. Asthma and other respiratory conditions associated with quaternary ammonium cleaning products are also reported in the public domain literature.

Creosote has had a long history of use as a wood preservative, but has been replaced by alternative products containing copper, chromium, or synthetic organic compounds. In addition to ICD, literature reports on creosote include cases of ICD, ACD, and squamous cell cancer. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classified creosote as a probable human carcinogen based on a very large number of case reports as well as clear evidence of carcinogenicity in animals (IARC 2017).

Glutaraldehyde is principally used as a medical disinfectant. Public literature on glutaraldehyde contains numerous reports of irritant and allergic dermatitis, as well as cases of related irritant or allergic occupational asthma, chiefly in medical personnel.

Hypochlorites and other chlorine-based antimicrobials account for a large percentage of overall pesticide use on account of reported industrial sales. Hypochlorite products have been reported to cause severe irritation in the Draize assay. Triazine derivatives, used to prevent photodegredation of chlorine in pools and water treatment systems, also have extensive use and marked irritant properties. One such triazine derivative is cyanuric acid.

Sensitization to hypochlorite has been reported in the form of contact urticarial (Hostynek et al. 1989). Nevertheless, most sodium hypochloritecontaining antimicrobials are not labeled as sensitizers. Although testing with the Buehler and guinea pig maximization protocols did not show evidence of sensitization. No sensitization study on cyanuric acid was available for review. Irritant dermatitis associated with hypochlorite is a frequent occurrence. In cases with breakdown of the epidermis, sensitization may occur (Hostynek et al. 1989).

Phenolic disinfectants include 173 different chemical codes, many with numerous inactive and no active registrations. These include noteworthy agents such as tert-butyl-phenol, a sensitizer and a classic cause of occupational leukoderma, and the chloracnegens 2,4,5-trichlorophenol and pentachlorophenol. Hexachlorophene is no longer registered but has been reported to cause sensitization (Praditsuwan et al. 1995), occupational asthma (Nagy and Orosz 1984), and neurotoxicity (Shuman et al. 1974; Rose et al. 1975; McCarl 1975; Ramu et al. 2016). Formerly registered dinitrophenol compounds, used as herbicides, uncouple oxidative phosphorylation; during the 1940s, they were prescribed as weight loss agents, but were associated with the occurrence of cataracts.

# 4.1 Terpene Compounds

Limonene and linalool are volatile terpenes produced by plants commonly referred to as essential oils. These chemicals are often used as fragrances in cleaning products as they have been shown to have activity against $S .$ . aureus and Aspergillus (Vieira-Brock et al. 2017). These terpenes, much like citronella, are also used as insect repellents (Lee 2018). Given the natural occurrence of limonene and linalool in plants, the source of exposure would likely be from plants in an agricultural setting and from cleaning or pesticide commercial products in the industrial setting. Oxidation of limonene and linalool leads to hydroperoxide formation with both the potential for ICD and ACD (Ogueta et al. 2022; Schubert et al. 2023). In a retrospective patch testing study of 5773 patients, the prevalence rates of contact allergy to oxidized linalool and limonene were $7 . 0 \%$ and $5 . 1 \%$ respectively (Sukakul et al. 2022).

Pine oil is a mixture of terpenes produced by the high-temperature distillation of oil of turpentine residues or by the catalytic hydration of pinenes. It contains tertiary and secondary cyclic terpene alcohols, varying with the source of turpentine and the production method. Pine oil has potential systemic toxicity on ingestion due to its content of isopropanol. Sensitization may be due to the multiple terpene alcohols in the distillate.

# 4.2 Isothiazoline Compounds

Isothiazoline compounds are used as biocides for disinfection. The illness registry categorizes isothiazolones as Kathon or “isothiazoline disinfectants.” The 1982–2014 data identified 35 cases of dermatitis associated with Kathon or as isothiazoline, cases principally occurring in handlers (Table 7). Numerous reports in public domain literature document the capacity of isothiazolines to sensitize. Cases of occupational ACD to octhilinone used as a fungicide for surface paint of roof sheets, for workers in paint manufacturing, and farm workers have been reported. Recent articles have noted multiple cases of sensitization related to isothiazoline preservatives (Kathon CG) used in makeup and other skin care products, with clusters of cases from the Czech Republic, Belgium, France, Spain, and Brazil. Isothiazoline compounds used as preservatives in formulations can also cause sensitization, sometimes mistakenly attributed to the formulation AI (refer to glyphosate discussion).

Octhilinone, an isothiazoline compound, has registered uses as a microbiocide, algicide, or fungicide. As a biocide, it is used in industrial processes and water systems. Octhilinone is also used as a preservative in paint, adhesives, and plastics, to control sapstain and mold on wood, as a treatment for textiles, and even in shampoos and cosmetics. This does not include cutting oils and other industrial fluids.

Ethylene oxide (also known as epoxy ethane) is used as a fumigant and a sterilant. Ethylene oxide, first used as an agricultural fumigant in 1928, is effective against all microorganisms. In California, ethylene oxide is registered for commercial and institutional uses. In these settings (hospitals, nursing homes, and veterinary clinics), ethylene oxide is used to sterilize medical equipment sensitive to heat sterilization.

Public domain literature includes reports of severe irritant dermatitis and chemical burns from direct skin contact with ethylene oxide consistent with cases reported to the California registry. Animal studies strongly suggest that ethylene oxide is carcinogenic. Multiple studies have produced limited evidence of elevated human cancer rates. Some studies showed a mildly increased risk of breast cancer and evidence of a dose– response effect (Steenland et al. 2004; Mikoczy et al. 2011).

Methyl bromide (bromomethane) is a broadspectrum fumigant used as an acaricide, antimicrobial, fungicide, herbicide, insecticide, nematicide, and vertebrate control agent. It has been used for insect control in grain elevators, mills, ships, and greenhouses. It has also been used as a postharvest treatment of commodities. The most prevalent use for methyl bromide is as a preplant fumigant, injected into the soil at various depths. Use for structural fumigation is now prohibited. Under the Clean Air Act and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, US production and import of methyl bromide has been banned as of January 1, 2005, except for critical use exemptions.

# 5 Fumigants

Fumigants produce gas, vapor fumes, or smoke intended to destroy insects, bacteria, or rodents. They may be volatile liquids and solids as well as substances already gaseous. They may be used for structural pest control, or to disinfect materials that can be enclosed to contain the fumigant. In California, a primary use of fumigants is on strawberry, carrot, and tomato fields.

Soil fumigants typically pose potential risks to those involved in the application or perform work following the application of these chemicals. There may also be a potential risk of eye and respiratory irritation for those who reside near fumigant-treated fields (O’Malley et al. 2005). Cases of dermatitis associated with select fumigants are shown in Table 7.

Methyl bromide causes corrosion in the Draize assay. The public domain literature on methyl bromide contains many reports on burns from methyl bromide. In many instances, the topical exposure was associated with systemic absorption and neurological symptoms.

Dichloropropene and ethylene dibromide (EDB), like methyl bromide, are volatile, lowmolecular-weight alkylhalogen compounds with high systemic toxicity. EDB was canceled during the 1980s because of concern about its carcinogenicity in rodent bioassays and widespread contamination of groundwater. Prior to the

No animal sensitization studies were available for review, but the products registered in California are labeled as sensitizers.

Methyl iodide (iodomethane) has been used as an intermediate in the manufacture of some pharmaceuticals and pesticides. Although approved in 2010, methyl iodide is no longer registered as a pesticidal AI with the state of California. Preplant fumigant uses of methyl iodide are proposed to replace those of methyl bromide. It had limited use in 2012, before registration was canceled by the registrant in March 2012.

Metam sodium and metam potassium are broad-spectrum soil fumigants with fungicidal, insecticidal, nematocidal, herbicidal, and antimicrobial properties. Metam fumigants are registered as agricultural soil fumigants for use on all food, feed, and fiber crops. They are also registered as antimicrobial agents, used to treat wooden poles, timbers, sewage sludge, and animal waste. Restricted uses of metam sodium include uses as a root control agent in sewers and drains. As either the potassium or sodium salt, metam rapidly degrades to methylisothiocyanate (MITC) in the environment, particularly in the presence of moisture. MITC is a highly volatile compound responsible for the biocidal properties of metam fumigants. MITC itself is registered as an antimicrobial agent for wood poles and pilings.

Cases of contact dermatitis associated with metam sodium have been reported in several jurisdictions around the world. Current problems with metam-sodium involve environmental exposures from off-site movement. Typical events involve multiple cases, with predominantly eye, respiratory and systemic symptoms, rather than contact dermatitis (O’Malley et al. 2004, 2005).

Dazomet, like metam-sodium, breaks down to release MITC, but is typically formulated in a granular form that allows low-volume preplant treatment of ornamental beds. When dazomet is applied to soil, it quickly breaks down to its major degradant, MITC, but formaldehyde, monomethylamine, hydrogen sulfide, and (in acid soils) carbon disulfide are also formed. Contact cancelation, it was used as a broad-spectrum fumigant in a manner similar to current use of dermatitis, both irritant and allergic, has been reported to dazomet in the public domain literature.

Chloropicrin used in concentrations greater than $2 \%$ is considered an active biocidal ingredient rather than a warning agent. Similar to other fumigants, it interferes with target cell chemistry at multiple sites. The $9 9 . 5 \%$ technical liquid caused corrosion in the Draize assay. There were no dermal sensitization studies available for review. Corrosion associated with liquid chloropicrin was reported during World War I when it was used as a chemical weapon (Underhill 1919).

1,3-Dichloropropene (1,3-D, or trade name Telone) is a mixture of 1,3-dichloropropene cisand trans-isomers. A contaminant, 1;1,2- dichloropropane, may also be present in small quantities $( < 0 . 1 \% )$ . It is used as a nematicide, fungicide, insecticide, and herbicide on food, feed, fiber, and on nursery crops. As a restricted use pesticide, 1,3-D can only be applied by certified applicators. In 2009, 1,3-D ranked fifth for pesticide use in California, based on use by weight. 1,3-D is a cutaneous irritant and may occasionally provoke ACD.

# 6 Fungicides

There are various pesticides used to kill or inhibit the growth of fungi and their spores. Categories of fungicides include dimethylfumarate, inorganic compounds such as sulfur and copper, phthalimide compounds, thiocarbamates, and ergosterol synthesis inhibitors. Cases of fungicide-related dermatitis are shown in Table 7.

Dimethylfumarate (DMF) is a fungicide and desiccant typically used to preserve and transport clothes and furniture. The anti-mold properties used to prevent mold growth in leathers in shoes and handbags. DMF has also been used on chairs and sofas and led to a phenomenon known as “sofa dermatitis” in Europe starting in 2007 (Susitaival et al. 2010). Since this incident, DMF has been banned in Europe for use in commercial products. While sofa dermatitis was seen in those who dichloropropene. Dichloropropene mixtures with chloropicrin caused corrosion in the Draize assay.

purchased sofas, DMF could be a source of occupational dermatitis from commercial shipping, handling, and retail of products containing the chemical.

# 6.1 Inorganic Compounds

Sulfur probably is the oldest known fungicide, used to control powdery mildews, certain rusts, leaf blights, and fruit rots. Ticks and mites are also susceptible to sulfur. Elemental sulfur exists in various crystalline forms, with rings containing 6, 8, 10, or 12 sulfur atoms, or repeating concatenated chains (Cotton and Wilkinson 1972). Insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents, wettable sulfur is prepared by adding wetting and dispersing agents to finely ground sulfur. Micronized wettable sulfur is made by means of a special manufacturing process to ensure an extremely fine particle size.

By pound, sulfur continues to be the most applied pesticide in the state of California (DPR 2015a). Many of the sulfur products registered are for fruits and vegetables. Grapes and peanuts are examples of crops commonly treated with sulfur. Sulfur also has uses for vertebrate control and for treatment of conditions in domesticated animals such as dogs and horses. Cases of dermatitis in applicators demonstrate its capacity for causing skin irritation, especially in hot weather when transformation to irritant oxides of sulfur may occur more readily. Cases of ACD have also been reported.

Copper products are extensively used in various agricultural and industrial settings as fungicide, algaecide, and wood preservatives. Copper compounds formulated as dusts and as powders are irritating to the skin, respiratory tract, and the eyes. Particularly, copper hydroxide, basic copper sulfate, and copper sulfate pentahydrate have been reported to have severe skin and eye irritation potential (Hostynek and Maibach 2004).

# 6.2 Phthalimide Compounds

With a common structure of a six-sided (cyclohexene, partially unsaturated cyclohexane, or benzene) ring joined to a heterocyclic fivesided (indole) ring, the phthalimido compounds can act as reactive electrophiles. This chemical property correlates with contact sensitization and carcinogenicity in animal studies. According to studies of captan given orally to animals, phthalimide breaks down to the irritant thiophosgene and to metabolites with partially intact dicarboximide compounds such as tetrahydrophthalimide (THPI), thiazolidine-2-thione4-carboxylic acid (TTCA), or phthalic acid. Measurement of metabolites can be used to estimate exposure when the relationship of absorbed dose and individual metabolites has been established (Galea et al. 2011, 2015; Berthet et al. 2012). For purposes of predicting the skin effects of captan and the other phthalimido compounds, the potential formation of irritant thiophosgene by dermal metabolism appears the most significant. Captan is still used in the USA. Based on the published literature, plandrel, captafol, and folpet have chiefly been used in Europe.

Captan is a widely used fungicide on a variety of food and feed crops and ornamental plants. It is also used as a seed protectant and in adhesives and paints as an antimicrobial. Agricultural workers may be exposed during and after spraying operations. Studies on pesticide ACD in India and Taiwan identified captan as a common sensitizer in farmers. Marzulli and Maibach (1974) demonstrated that a captan concentration of $1 \%$ is a significant contact allergic sensitizer. Captan was reported to be a frequent sensitizer in Danish greenhouse and garden workers (Paulsen 1998). The ICDRG and NACDG later found captan in a $1 \%$ concentration to be an irritant on patch testing; $0 . 2 5 \%$ in petrolatum is now preferred for patch testing. Positive photo-patch test reaction to $0 . 1 \%$ captan in petrolatum has also been reported (Mark et al. 1999).

Captafol (Difolatan) is a broad-spectrum protective contact fungicide that is no longer sold in the USA. It is effective for the control of almost all fungal diseases of plants except powdery mildews and is still used outside the USA. It is reported as a moderate irritant and sensitizer on an Extoxnet toxicology summary (EXTOXNET 1998). Public domain literature includes multiple reports regarding captafol-associated ACD.

# 6.3 Thiocarbamate Compounds

The thiocarbamate class includes reactive disulfide and tetrasulfide compounds and related sulfur-metal complex compounds with manganese or zinc. Related potassium and sodium thiocarbamate salts are used as fumigants. The compounds interact broadly with fungal enzyme systems. Potential systemic adverse reactions include antithyroid activity produced by the thiocarbamate metabolite ethylenethiourea (ETU), antithyroid activity similar to propylthiouracil (PTU), and inhibition of alcohol metabolism similar to disulfiram (Antabuse). ETU produces thyroid adenomas in rodent cancer studies and the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) terms the evidence as sufficient to classify it as an animal carcinogen, although the evidence from human cancer studies is inconclusive (classified as inadequate by IARC).

Thiocarbamates and ETU have wide use in the production of rubber products. Bruze and Fregert (1983) initially identified ETU as a contact sensitizer in a 53-year-old woman with dermatitis of the fingers, who had worked for 15 years handling natural and synthetic rubber. Twenty controls did not react to $1 \%$ aqueous ETU. She reacted to a sample of black rubber and to ETU in aqueous concentrations between $0 . 0 1 \%$ and $1 \%$ , but not to $0 . 0 0 1 \%$ ETU. Many of the thiocarbamate fungicides also cause sensitization, possibly because of metabolism that generates ETU in the skin.

Thiophanate-methyl (TM) is a systemic fungicide with a broad spectrum of activity for plant disease. TM is used on a variety of trees, vine, and other crops, as well as lawns and ornamentals. There are no registered food uses in the USA. There have been many cases of apparent ICD, but few cases of ACD to thiophanate-methyl have been reported.

Pentachloronitrobenzene (PCNB) is a halogenated nitrobenzene fungicide used as a seed treatment and to control diseases on vegetable and field crops, turf, and ornamentals. Positive patch testing to PCNB, $1 \%$ in petrolatum, has been described for a worker packing pesticide powders who developed dermatitis (Cronin 1980). Positive PCNB patch test reactions occurred in nursery workers with exposure from routine handling and residue contact (O’Malley et al. 1995). Most workers did not recall individual materials handled and work records were not available. It was not possible to determine if the PCNB reactions arose from prior exposure or from de novo sensitization.

# 6.4 Ergosterol Synthesis Inhibitors

The ergosterol synthesis inhibitors have a common mechanism, that of blocking synthesis of fungal desmethyl sterols or ergosterols which are important to the integrity of the fungal cell membrane. The inhibitors include conazoles (triazoles) and miscellaneous complex ring compounds such as myclobutanil, metalaxly, and triforine. Pharmaceutical products with similar mechanisms include miconazole, clotrimazole, and ketoconazole. Triforine (Saprol) inhibits ergosterol synthesis in fungi, similar to conazole compounds. Ergosterol inhibitors have broad agricultural use on nuts, stone fruit, berries, vineyards, ornamental crops, and landscape. Cases of ACD to pharmaceutical ergosterol inhibitors have been reported in the public domain literature. Imazalil, used to prevent postharvest spoilage of fruit, has caused ACD in banana packing/processing workers (Penagos et al. 2004; Penagos 2002). California illness surveillance data include similar cases in workers packing/processing citrus treated with an imazalil.

# 6.5 Miscellaneous Fungicides

Fluazinam (Shirlan) is a broad-spectrum fungicide of the phenyl-pyridinamine chemical class; it functions by interfering with fungal mitochondrial function. It is registered with the U.S. EPA for agricultural use on a variety of crops, including peanuts, potatoes, and beans.

Chlorothalonil is an electrophile that inhibits thiol enzymes important for fungal spore germination (Leroux et al. 2002) and sulfhydryl groups important in glycolysis and fungal respiration. Depending on the species and route of administration, various glutathione conjugates can be measured as urinary metabolites (Parsons 2001). It has a soil half-life of about 2 months and is stable on exposure to ultraviolet light. The U.S. EPA (1999) noted in its registration eligibility document (RED) that manufactured chlorothalonil contains up to $0 . 0 5 \%$ contamination with hexachlorobenzene. In a patch test study, Liden (1990) reported that a chemical analysis of a sample $4 0 . 4 \%$ chlorothalonil obtained from the manufacturer contained pentachlorobenzonitrile in concentrations of $1 { - } 6 \ \mathrm { g / L }$ . Public domain literature includes reports of irritant dermatitis, ACD, and contact urticaria.

present an unexpected risk of dermal sensitization. During the 1980s, a case of sensitization initially attributed to glyphosate subsequently proved related to an isothiazoline compound used in the formulation (Hindson and Diffey 1984a, b). Penagos (2002) reported two cases of apparent sensitization to glyphosate in patch test series from Panama. It is not clear whether an isothiazoline preservative might have been present in either of the reported cases. Additionally, glyphosate, particularly the isopropylamine salt of glyphosate, has been associated with non-Hodgkin lymphoma according to some studies and not observed by others (Andreotti et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Weisenburger 2021).

# 7 Herbicides

Herbicides are used to control undesirable vegetation and are now frequently used in place of hand labor or machine cultivation. Modes of action include by interfering with electron transport in photosynthesis, disruption of microtubule function, inhibition of lipid synthesis and amino acid synthesis, and mimicry of plant hormone (auxin) function. Most have low systemic toxicity, but the very reactive bipyridyl compounds interfere with many mammalian cell functions and may prove fatal with sufficient exposure. The most numerous agricultural applications of herbicides occur in row-crop farming, but nonagricultural applications of lawns, parks, golf courses, and other areas are also common. Herbicides are also used to control aquatic weeds in irrigation and industrial water systems. Cases of dermatitis associated with select herbicides are shown in Table 7.

Glyphosate [N-(phosphonomethyl) glycine] is a nonselective, postemergence herbicide used on many food and nonfood field crops as well as lawns and turf, residential areas, greenhouses, forest plantings, and industrial rights-of-way. Based on its mode of action, most formulations are inherently low risk (e.g., oral L $\mathrm { . D 5 0 > 5 0 0 0 m g / k g }$ in the rat, per acute toxicity reported to (DPR 2001)). A commonly marketed formulation mixing glyphosate and the bipyridyl diquat presents additional risk. Mixtures with the herbicide metolachlor may

# 7.1 Bipyridyl Compounds

Paraquat and diquat are bipyridyl compounds that have reactive ammonium ions in their core structures. Superoxides generated by the bipyridyl compounds damage plant cell membranes and cytoplasm and are especially active during photosynthesis. The compounds are absorbed by foliage and translocated into the plant vascular system. Both paraquat and diquat are contact herbicides and desiccants, used on cotton, potatoes, and soybeans, alfalfa, clover, and soybeans. They have no biological activity once absorbed onto clay soils or organic matter (Penagos et al. 2000). However, some degradation on leaf surfaces results from photodecomposition (Tomlin 1997). The acute toxicity of paraquat (rat oral $\begin{array} { l l l } { { \mathrm { L D 5 0 } } } & { { = } } & { { 1 2 6 ~ \mathrm { \ m g / k g } \nonumber } } \end{array}$ far exceeds that of glyphosate.

Paraquat-related ICDs have been reported. Because of limited dermal absorption, skin contact with paraquat does not usually result in systemic poisoning, with exceptions as reported in public domain literature (Zhou et al. 2013; Wesseling et al. 1997; Garnier et al. 1994; Smith 1988; Newhouse et al. 1978). Prolonged skin contact and prior damage to skin appear as predisposing factors in many fatal cases.

Workers in factories where paraquat is manufactured have an increased risk of occupationally induced keratoses, Bowen’s disease, and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin (Bowra et al. 1982; Wang et al. 1987). The manufacturing process stream, potentially contaminated with tarry polynuclear aromatics, may have caused these premalignant and malignant skin lesions, rather than the paraquat itself.

Diquat (or diquat dibromide), like paraquat, owes its herbicidal action to its effect on cell membranes and enzyme systems. This nonselective mechanism accounts for its mammalian toxicity. Clark and Hurst (1970) reported a rat oral LD50 for diquat equal to $2 3 1 \mathrm { m g / k g }$ . Doses higher than the LD50 produced CNS symptoms; chronic low-dose administration in both dogs and rats produced both produced cataracts.

Amitrole (Aminotriazole) is a systemic herbicide used to control nonselective grasses, broadleaf weeds, cattails, poison ivy, and certain aquatic weeds. It is registered for nonfood uses, primarily industrial and nonagricultural uses, soils, and ornamental crops. One case of ACD to aminotriazole has been reported in a contract weed control operator (English et al. 1986).

Pyrazon [5-amino-4-chloro-2-phenyl-3(2H)- pyridazinone], also known as chloridazon, is a herbicide belonging to the pyridazinone class of pesticides. It inhibits photosynthesis by blocking electron transport. Pyrazon is registered for use on sugar beets and red table beets to control certain weeds. This compound is also registered for commercial use on ornamentals, including bulb crops and roses. Pyrazon can persist in the soil for several months.

Pyrazon causes minimal irritation in the Draize assay and is negative in predictive animal sensitization studies. A formulation registered in Canada carries a sensitization warning, possibly related to an isothiazolin compound that was included as a preservative. ACD to pyrazon spray has been reported in a farmer who developed dermatitis every spring when spraying pyrazon (chloridazon) or thinning treated plants (Bruze and Fregert 1982). Patch testing with a $1 \%$ concentration of the AI and the formulated product $43 \%$ AI) caused a vesicular, bullous reaction. Additional testing showed a positive response to $0 . 0 1 \%$ but not to $0 . 0 0 1 \%$ AI.

Phenmedipham (Betanal) belongs to the phenylcarbamate family and functions by inhibiting electron transport during plant photosynthesis. It controls early-stage broadleaf weeds for beets and spinach. Severe allergic dermatitis associated with phenmedipham (Betanal) was confirmed by patch testing in two farmers (Nater and Grosfeld 1979). Cases of dermatitis accompanied by systemic hypersensitivity have also been reported.

Dichlobenil (2,6-dichlorobenzonitrile) inhibits shoot formation from roots, acting principally as a pre-emergent herbicide. Draize tests on multiple formulations showed only minimal irritation. The technical formulation did not produce sensitization in a guinea pig study, but a $1 5 \%$ aqueous concentrate was positive in an assay using an intradermal induction phase. Development of facial comedones in men engaged in mixing or bagging dichlobenil was also reported. The lag times varied from 1 week to 5 months after beginning work, and none of the men had history of facial acne.

Triazines (atrazine, propazine, and simazine) are chlorinated triazine herbicides, systemic herbicides usually applied to the soil. Once absorbed through leaves and roots, these herbicides act by inhibiting photosynthesis within the targeted plant. They are widely used as selective to control most annual grasses and broadleaf weeds before the weeds emerge or after the removal of weed growth. The triazine herbicides have common chlorinated breakdown products and common mechanisms of toxicity.

The triazines cause minimal irritation in the Draize test and do not cause sensitization in predictive allergy testing. California surveillance data does include occasional cases of irritation in pesticide handlers associated with direct accidental exposures. The public domain literature does not clearly document cases of ACD associated with triazines.

Acetanilides (chloroacetamide) herbicides include alachlor, butachlor, metolachlor, and propachlor. These herbicides inhibit cell elongation and cell division, limiting the emergence of developing leaves and roots. They act by electrophilic inhibition of elongase, the enzyme initiating the elongation of very-long-chain fatty acids.

Draize tests show moderate irritation for concentrated formulations of allidochlor and butachlor. Predictive sensitization assays are positive for acetochlor, alachlor, and butachlor. ACD confirmed by patch testing has been reported in public domain literature. A case of IgE-mediated allergic hepatitis associated with dermal exposure to butachlor in a worker from India was reported (Daryani et al. 2007). Butachlor is a rice herbicide, not currently registered in the USA or the EU, but widely used in Asia.

2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid $( 2 , 4 \ – D )$ is a herbicide in the phenoxy or phenoxyacetic acid family. Like 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) and sterically similar products, it functions as a synthetic plant hormone or auxin that disrupts normal growth of broadleaf weeds. Cases of ACD in farmers have been reported. Severe contact dermatitis associated with a mixture of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T has been noted.

# 7.2 Plant Growth Promoters and Inhibitors

Choline chloride (also known as chlormequat chloride) belongs to the quaternary ammonium class of chemicals. As a growth inhibitor, choline chloride interferes with the synthesis of various plant hormones related to plant growth and development. It is used on a variety of ornamentals grown in greenhouses and nurseries, and as a turf treatment. There are currently no registered residential or food uses. A case of contact dermatitis to choline chloride has been reported (Fischer 1984). California surveillance data do not show illnesses associated with choline chloride, but do show occasional reports of dermatitis associated with the related compound mepiquat chloride.

Hydrogen cyanamide stimulates plant growth in a fashion similar to mechanical pruning by breaking dormancy in grapevine floral buds. This appears to result from intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. In mammals, the biochemical effects include blocking the action of aldehyde dehydrogenase in the metabolism of alcohol, permitting the accumulation of acetaldehyde.

Cases of work-related illness involving hydrogen cyanamide have been reported. These involved a mix of irritant skin reactions and systemic symptoms. A case involving accidental ingestion required intensive medical attention for shock, coma, miosis, and hepatic necrosis. Another case involving deliberate ingestion of $50 \%$ hydrogen cyanamide proved to be fatal. Because of the potential embarrassment of claiming compensation for Antabuse-like reactions, the actual number of cases is unknown.

# 8 Insecticides

The new structural categories of insecticides shown in Table 3 were associated with few reported cases of dermatitis. The following section concentrates on plant-derived compounds (pyrethrum, pyrethrin, and their synthetic derivatives; nicotine and rotenone), the cholinesterase inhibitors, currently registered organochlorines, organotin compounds, and biologicals.

Pyrethrum from the dried flowers of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium is the most widely used botanical insecticide in the USA. Refined pyrethrum or pyrethrin esters are the AIs extracted from pyrethrum. The flowers and extracts for pyrethrum are imported from Kenya and Ecuador into the USA. Although pyrethrins are powerful, fast-acting contact-insecticides that are effective at very low concentrations, they have a low order of systemic toxicity to most mammals.

The active principals are pyrethrins I and II, cinerins I and II, and jasmolin I and II, collectively known as pyrethrins. Pyrethrins are used extensively in stock sprays, pet sprays, household sprays, aerosols, and food protection in warehouses. Considered nonsynthetic, pyrethrins have been allowed in organic crop production. Pyrethrins are stable for long periods in waterbased aerosols, in which modern emulsifiers are used. To increase effectiveness, pyrethrins may be mixed with a synergist such as piperonyl butoxide (PBO). PBO is a synthetic compound that inhibits metabolic degradation of the AI.

Dermatitis from natural pyrethrins is usually reported to occur on exposed body parts. Mitchell et al. (1972) identified the sesquiterpene lactone pyrethrosin as the chief allergen in unrefined pyrethrin. Asthma and urticaria have also been reported as reactions to natural pyrethrin (Franzosa et al. 2007). However, the authors contend that refined pyrethrum currently used lacks the presence of proteins and other allergens likely to cause type I hypersensitivity. The report also provides an interesting summary of possible cases of type I reaction to unrefined or minimally refined pyrethrins dating back to 1897.

Caution should be used when interpreting results of allergy tests performed with current pyrethrum allergen extracts; Osimitz et al. (2009) found no detectable pyrethrins and pyrethrosin in six commercially available pyrethrum allergen extracts analyzed. Aside from the absence of pyrethrins and pyrethrosins, unknown components, such as high-molecular-weight proteins or other impurities that may cause dermal reactions, could be present in significant amounts. Moreover, recent reports of pyrethrum-producing ACD in humans and speculations of crossreactions occurring in ragweed-sensitized people should also be interpreted critically.

Pyrethroids are synthetic compounds produced to duplicate the biological activity of the active principals of pyrethrum. Pyrethroids have a longer duration of activity against insects than pyrethrum and have greater biological potency. In acute oral toxicity studies, they typically have much lower LD50 than pyrethrin. They are not teratogenic, mutagenic, or carcinogenic in animal studies.

There are two main classes of these synthetic insecticides. Type I pyrethroids do not have an alpha-cyano group (allethrin, alphamethrin, barthrin, biopermethrin, bioresmethrin, cismethrin, cyclethrin, indothrin, permethrin, phthalthrin, and resmethrin), while type II pyrethroids have an alpha-cyano group attached to the 3-phenoxybenzyl alcohol of the molecule (deltamethrin, cypermethrin, fenvalerate, and fenpropathrin). Like with pyrethrins, the activity of pyrethroids may be enhanced by the addition of a synergist such as PBO.

The primary route of occupational exposure for pyrethroids is skin contact. Systemic toxicity from occupational contact with these agents is minimal. The most prominent health symptom that accompanies topical contact with these agents appears to be paresthesia caused by pyrethroid stimulation of cutaneous nerve endings. The symptom resembles paresthesias produced by stimulant drugs, but occurs at the site of contact. Inhalation may produce stimulation of superficial nerves in the upper respiratory passages, increased nasal secretions, and other rhinitis symptoms, sometimes accompanied by transient systemic symptoms (Spencer and O’Malley 2006).

Temporary paresthesias manifested by numbness, itching, burning, tingling, and warmth have been reported following cutaneous exposure to the synthetic pyrethroid fenvalerate. Fenvalerate, produced in the USA, produces more paresthesias following topical exposure than pyrethrin and other pyrethroids. Topical vitamin E acetate appears to be highly effective in treating paresthesias induced by pyrethroids (Tucker et al. 1984) if applied in a timely way after exposure.

Nicotine is extracted from tobacco plants (Nicotiana species) and is one of the oldest botanical insecticides in use today. Having largely been replaced by organophosphate insecticides, only one product is currently registered for use with the U.S. EPA. Nicotine may be readily absorbed through the skin and is toxic to mammals (Saleeon et al. 2015; Gehlbach et al. 1974; McBride et al. 1998).

Transdermally absorbed nicotine-induced predominantly sudorific and rubiform reactions, which may be accompanied by subtle piloerection, hyperalgesia, and pruritus. Exposed workers may develop nausea, vomiting, dizziness, prostration, and weakness. Abrasions on the skin during the harvesting of tobacco leaves increase the percutaneous absorption of nicotine. No positive patch test reactions have been reported, even among cigar makers with dermatitis (Bonamonte et al. 2016).

Rotenone is a selective contact insecticide and repellent. Current registered products primarily target vertebrate animals, specifically fish. The cube plant is now the only commercial source in the USA of rotenone for insecticide production, although derris, timbo, and other related rotenonecontaining plants have been utilized. The plant root may be ground as a dust or extracted to provide concentrate.

Rotenone has, in the past, been used as dust for garden insects, lice, and ticks on vertebrate animals. Rotenone has also been used in combination with pyrethrin and PBO (a synergist) to control a wide variety of insects on food crops.

Rotenone results in relatively low acute toxicity with dermal exposure and has not been reported to be a sensitizer. Skin irritation from rotenone has been reported among workers in rotenone processing plants in South America. Skin inflammation was most notable in intertriginous areas or where the powder had been trapped by perspiration on the skin. A similar outbreak was reported among workers in France, but improved ventilation and dust masks diminished the occurrence of dermatitis in these workers (Hayes 1982).

Odor from an application of rotenone to a Northern California lake was associated with symptoms in residents of a nearby community. The odor was probably related to a naphthalenerange aromatic solvent present in the formulation rather than the AI (Verder-Carlos and O’Malley 2002).

Spinosad is an organic insecticide made up of spinosyn A and spinosyn D, derived from soil microbes (actinomycete organism Saccharopolyspora spinosa). Spinosad compounds selectively inhibit nicotine receptors in insects (Kirst 2010).

# 8.1 Inorganic and Organometallic Insecticides

Arsenic compounds were the earliest insecticides against chewing insects, chiefly as copper acetoarsenite (Paris green), lead arsenate, and calcium arsenate. Sodium arsenite has been used as a sterilant herbicide and a potato vine killer. Sodium arsenate was formerly the toxicant in many ant syrups for household use, but this application has been discontinued. For the most part, inorganic arsenicals have been superseded because of their hazard to humans and animals.

A handful of products remain registered as a fungicide and insecticide for use as wood protection treatments (arsenic acid and arsenic pentoxide). Arsenic trioxide is also currently available as an ant bait and insecticide. Organic arsenicals such as monosodium methanearsonate (MSMA), disodium methanearsonate (DSMA), calcium acid methanearsonate (CAMA), and dimethylarsinic acid (cacodylic acid) were herbicides used primarily on cotton and turf and lawns. However, uses of organic arsenic herbicides were discontinued due to concerns that applied organic arsenicals could potentially transform into more toxic inorganic forms, which may contaminate drinking water. Inorganic arsenic is both a cutaneous irritant and sensitizer. Hyperkeratosis, hyperhidrosis, and hypermelanosis are considered evidence of chronic systemic exposure. The hyperpigmentation is most marked on surfaces exposed to light and does not extend to mucous membranes. There may be a speckled depigmentation of pigmented areas giving a “raindrop” appearance. Arsenic compounds similar to or identical to those used as pesticides have been shown to be carcinogenic in man (Hayes 1982). Agricultural workers are also exposed to chronic ultraviolet (UV) light. It had been believed that UV light exposure was a more significant factor for these workers than their exposure to inorganic arsenic.

Fenbutatin-oxide provides an alternative to propargite for the control of mites. Other organotin compounds are used primarily as antimicrobials in industrial settings. No public domain reports on skin effects of fenbutatinoxide were found. The 31 studies retrieved focused on analytical and product chemistry, and pest resistance.

Propargite is an organosulfite that controls mites by inhibition of a mitochondrial enzyme, ATP synthase. It causes direct skin irritation, both in pesticide handlers (mixers, loaders, applicators, field flaggers for aerial applications, and workers who repair contaminated spray equipment) and field workers in contact with residue. The long environmental half-life has necessitated long postapplication re-entry intervals.

A noteworthy $30 \%$ extended-release preparation has not been registered since the 1990s; it was associated with an outbreak of dermatitis among orange harvesters published in 1986. The environmental dissipation rate for this formulation did not differ substantially from the rate for the $32 \%$ wettable powder (WP), studied during a subsequent outbreak in 1988. However, the initial residue deposition was markedly elevated compared to the WP formulation.

# 8.2 Kerosene, Petroleum Distillates, and Other Solvents

Aliphatic solvents include mineral oils and aliphatic petroleum hydrocarbons, which are products of various types of petroleum distillation processes. These chemicals have had insecticide and/or larvicide uses as spray oils on agricultural crops and by residential homeowners, as well as occupational and residential uses as acaricides, fungicides, and herbicides, in addition to aquatic uses as mosquito larvicides/pupacides. These chemicals are also commonly used as inert ingredients in formulations of pesticides with other AIs. Petroleum oil, mineral oil, petroleum distillates, and kerosene each ranked in the top 100 pesticides used in California in 2015, based on pounds applied statewide (DPR 2015a).

Kerosene, first used in 1877, may have been the first petroleum oil to be used for insect control. Presently, it is widely used as a solvent or carrier for household and industrial pesticide sprays. Registered in the state of California as an adjuvant (broadly defined as any nonpesticide material added to a pesticide product or pesticide spray mixture to enhance the pesticide’s performance), kerosene is considered to be an “inert” ingredient by the U.S. EPA. Kerosene may be sulfonated to provide an odorless oil, or deodorants may also be added.

Kerosene and other petroleum distillates are known cutaneous irritants. An eruption similar to that of toxic epidermal necrolysis “irritant pseudotoxic epidermal necrolysis” was described in a boy whose clothing became contaminated with kerosene (Barnes and Wilkinson 1973). In general, petroleum distillates and other solvents have poor dermal permeability in the vapor phase. Some compounds can be dermally absorbed with prolonged skin contact (e.g., toluene, carbon tetrachloride). For some aliphatic solvents, mild skin irritation has been reported for short-term exposure, while dermatitis has been reported with repeat or prolonged skin contact.

# 8.3 Organophosphates

As a group, organophosphate compounds have a low capacity for causing skin irritation, based on their chemical structure. Individual compounds have reactive subgroups (termed “leaving groups,” separated by hydrolysis of the parent compound) that may produce irritation or sensitization. Noteworthy examples include naled and dichlorvos.

Many of the most toxic organophosphate compounds are no longer registered and the number of reported systemic poisonings drastically reduced (DPR 2004, 2010, 2015b). Nevertheless, evaluation of systemic toxicity is usually indicated when dermatitis from one of these agents occurs.

Dimethoate is a systemic organophosphorus (OP) insecticide/acaricide used on a variety of field-grown agricultural crops, tree crops, and ornamentals. All nonagricultural uses in the USA, including residential uses, were canceled in 2000. The major toxic degradate of dimethoate is omethoate $_ { \mathrm { ~ \scriptsize ~ \cdot ~ O ~ } , O }$ -dimethyl S-(Nmethylcarbamoylmethyl) phosphorothioate]. Omethoate is registered as an AI internationally, but not in the USA. Use of OPs in California has continuously declined since 1995 (DPR 2004, 2010, 2015b).

Malathion is a broad-spectrum organophosphate (OP) insecticide, with moderate to low systemic toxicity. Its uses include control of a wide variety of insects: in various food and feed crops, pastures and rangeland, outdoor garden insects around the home, and for pest eradication programs. The small number of current registrations, in contrast to the larger number of inactive registrations, reflects changing patterns of use.

Naled is an insecticide and acaricide used on food and feed crops and on nonfood crops (such as ornamentals, and alfalfa grown for seed and cotton). Public health and residential uses for naled are primarily for the control of mosquitos. It is also used to control black flies and leaf-eating insects. Intermediate in toxicity between malathion and parathion, naled is broken down by hydrolysis within a few hours. In its native form, the reactive element in naled is the dibromodichloropropanol moiety, hypothetically formed as an intact molecule on breakdown. Dichlorvos (DDVP) forms as an environmental transformation product of naled. Surface residues after naled application on grapes, for example, contain about $30 \%$ dichlorvos $6 \ : \mathrm { h r }$ . after application (Penagos et al. 2000).

Dichlorvos (2, 2-dichlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate), also known as DDVP, has been formulated as sprays, wettable powder, aerosols, resin strips, flea collars, and as a veterinary anthelmintic. It is closely related to two other OP insecticides, naled and trichlorfon. Both compounds metabolize or degrade to DDVP in food, water, or the environment. Accidental contact can cause irritation to the skin, possibly complicated by systemic cholinesterase inhibition.

# 8.4 Carbamates

The transient cholinesterase inhibition from carbamates often proves difficult to detect, but cholinesterase should be evaluated where possible in relevant cases of dermatitis. The following section focuses on currently registered compounds of moderate toxicity.

Carbaryl (trade name Sevin), a carbamate, is a widely used broad-spectrum insecticide for agricultural crops, professional turf management, home gardens, and control of ectoparasites on pets. Technical carbaryl and granular formulations cause only short-term irritation in predictive animal tests, and a concentrated dry flowable product did not cause sensitization in predictive allergy tests. Cases reported to the California illness registry indicate that carbaryl formulations can cause short-term irritant symptoms following direct accidental exposure. The registry shows similar cases for two other carbamates: methomyl and propoxur. Patch test series with positive tests for carbaryl include Penagos (2004) and Sharma and Kaur (1990).

Methiocarb (Mesurol) is a carbamate insecticide, acaricide, molluscicide, and avian repellant. ACD due to methiocarb has been reported.

# 8.5 Insect Repellants

Diethyltoluamide (DEET) is an insect repellent first developed by the U.S. Army for use by military personnel and later registered for use as an insect repellent in 1957. DEET, considered the best all-purpose insect and acaricide, is especially effective against mosquitoes. Poorly soluble in water, it is soluble in ethanol and propylene glycol and remains effective for several hours postapplication. DEET has repeatedly been associated with contact urticaria. At application rates greater than $30 \%$ , it can cause skin irritation.

# 9 Conclusion

The prevalence of pesticide-related dermatoses among agricultural workers underscores the importance of understanding the diverse array of pesticides they encounter. As revealed by the extensive list of pesticide active ingredients, the agricultural industry relies heavily on these chemical, biological, and physical agents to combat pests. The intricate classification of pesticides into various categories and chemical structures aids in comprehending their potential dermatological effects. While certain compounds have been consistently associated with skin manifestations, vigilance is required as novel pesticide groups emerge, often with unfamiliar chemical structures and modes of action. With the ongoing evolution of pesticide usage and registration, continued research and clinical awareness are paramount to effectively manage and prevent pesticide-related dermatoses in agricultural settings.

# References

Anderson SE, Shane H, Long C, Lukomska E, Meade BJ, Marshall NB (2016) Evaluation of the irritancy and hypersensitivity potential following topical application

of didecyldimethylammonium chloride. J Immuno132toxicol 13(4):557–566. https://doi.org/10. 3109/1547691X.2016.1140854   
Andreotti G, Koutros S, Hofmann JN, Sandler DP, Lubin JH, Lynch CF, Lerro CC, De Roos AJ, Parks CG, Alavanja MC, Silverman DT, Beane Freeman LE (2018) Glyphosate use and cancer incidence in the agricultural health study. J Natl Cancer Inst 110(5): 509–516. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djx233   
Barbaud A, Collet E, Milpied B (2013) A multicentre study to determine the value and safety of drug patch tests for the three main classes of severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Br J Dermatol 168(3):555–562. https://doi. org/10.1111/bjd.12125   
Barbaud A, Kurihara F, Raison-Peyron N, Milpied B, Valois A, Assier H, Morice C, Manciet JR, Gener G, Giordano-Labadie F, Marcant P, Bernier C, Amsler E, Crepy MN, Tetart F, Soria A, le Bouëdec MF, DermatoAllergology Group of the French Society of Dermatology (DAG) (2023) Allergic contact dermatitis from essential oil in consumer products: mode of uses and value of patch tests with an essential oil series. Results of a French study of the DAG (Dermato-Allergology group of the French Society of Dermatology). Contact Derm 89(3):190–197. https://doi.org/10.1111/cod. 14377   
Barnes RL, Wilkinson DS (1973) Epidermal necrolysis from clothing impregnated with paraffin. Br Med J 4 (5890):466–467   
Berthet A, Heredia-Ortiz R, Vernez D, Danuser B, Bouchard M (2012) A detailed urinary excretion time course study of captan and folpet biomarkers in workers for the estimation of dose, main route-ofentry and most appropriate sampling and analysis strategies. Ann Occup Hyg 56(7):815–828. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/annhyg/mes011   
Bonamonte D, Vestita M, Filoni A, Mastrolonardo M, Angelini G, Foti C (2016) Tobacco-induced contact dermatitis. Eur J Dermatol 26(3):223–231. https://doi. org/10.1684/ejd.2016.2771   
Bowra GT, Duffield DP, Osborn AJ, Purchase IF (1982) Premalignant and neoplastic skin lesions associated with occupational exposure to “tarry” byproducts during manufacture of $^ { 4 , 4 ^ { \prime } }$ -bipyridyl. Br J Ind Med 39(1): 76–81   
Bruze M, Fregert S (1982) Allergic contact dermatitis to chloridazon. Contact Derm 8(6):427   
Bruze M, Fregert S (1983) Allergic contact dermatitis from ethylene thiourea. Contact Derm 9(3):208–212   
Clark DG, Hurst EW (1970) The toxicity of diquat. Br J Ind Med 27(1):51–55   
Cotton F, Wilkinson G (1972) Advanced inorganic chemistry. Wiley, New York   
Cronin E (1980) Contact dermatitis. Health & Fitness, 1st edn. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh   
Dannaker CJ, Maibach HI, O’Malley M (1993) Contact urticaria and anaphylaxis to the fungicide chlorothalonil. Cutis 52(5):312–315   
Daryani NE, Hosseini P, Bashashati M, Haidarali M, Sayyah A (2007) Butachlor-induced acute toxic hepatitis. Indian J Gastroenterol 26(3):135–113   
DPR (2001) Product recommendation sheet. DPR, Sacramento   
DPR (2004) Use trends of cholinesterase-inhibiting pesticides 1994–2004. DPR, Sacramento   
DPR (2010) Use trends of cholinesterase-inhibiting pesticides 2001–2010. DPR, Sacramento   
DPR (2015a) Pesticide use reporting – 2015 summary data – top 100 pesticides by pounds. DPR, Sacramento   
DPR (2015b) Use trends of cholinesterase-inhibiting pesticides 2007–2015. DPR, Sacramento   
DPR (2024) Actively registered active ingredients by common name. www.cdpr.ca.gov. https://www.cdpr.ca. gov/docs/label/actai.htm. Accessed 13 Jan 2024   
English JS, Rycroft RJ, Calnan CD (1986) Allergic contact dermatitis from aminotriazole. Contact Derm 14(4): 255–256   
EXTOXNET (1998) EXTOXNET extension toxicology network. Cooperative extension offices of University of California-Davis, Oregon Sate University, Michigan State University, Cornell University, and University of Idahyo. http://extoxnet.orst.edu/ghindex.html. Accessed 6 July 2016   
Febriana SA, Ridora Y, Indrastuti N, Dewi K, Erdina O, K., Tanziha, I., Prakoeswa, C. R. S., Waskito, F., & Schuttelaar, M. L. (2023) Hazard identification and the prevalence of occupational skin disease in Indonesian batik workers. Sci Rep 13(1):5231. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41598-022-17890-w   
Fischer T (1984) Contact allergy to choline chloride. Contact Derm 10(5):316–317   
Franzosa JA, Osimitz TG, Maibach HI (2007) Cutaneous contact urticaria to pyrethrum-real?, common?, or not documented?: an evidence-based approach. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 26(1):57–72. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 15569520601183880   
Galea KS, MacCalman L, Jones K, Cocker J, Teedon P, Sleeuwenhoek AJ, Cherrie JW, van Tongeren M (2011) Biological monitoring of pesticide exposures in residents living near agricultural land. BMC Public Health 11:856. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-11-856   
Galea KS, MacCalman L, Jones K, Cocker J, Teedon P, Cherrie JW, van Tongeren M (2015) Comparison of residents’ pesticide exposure with predictions obtained using the UK regulatory exposure assessment approach. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 73(2):634–643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2015.09.012   
Garnier R, Chataigner D, Efthymiou ML, Moraillon I, Bramary F (1994) Paraquat poisoning by skin absorption: report of two cases. Vet Hum Toxicol 36(4):313– 315   
Gehlbach SH, Williams WA, Perry LD, Woodall JS (1974) Green-tobacco sickness. An illness of tobacco harvesters. JAMA 229(14):1880–1883   
Hayes WJ (1982) Pesticides studied in man. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore   
Hindson C, Diffey B (1984a) Phototoxicity of glyphosate in a weedkiller. Contact Derm 10(1):51–52   
Hindson TC, Diffey BL (1984b) Phototoxicity of a weedkiller: a correction. Contact Derm 11(4):260   
Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI (2004) Skin irritation potential of copper compounds. Toxicol Mech Methods 14(4): 205–213. https://doi.org/10.1080/15376520490446365   
Hostynek JJ, Patrick E, Younger B, Maibach HI (1989) Hypochlorite sensitivity in man. Contact Derm 20(1): 32–37   
IARC (2017) IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans, vol 1–118. International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon   
Kirst HA (2010) The spinosyn family of insecticides: realizing the potential of natural products research. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 63(3):101–111. https://doi.org/10.1038/ ja.2010.5   
Lachapelle JM (1997) A proposed relevance scoring system for positive allergic patch test reactions: practical implications and limitations. Contact Derm 36(1):39–43   
Lammintausta K, Zimerson E, Winhoven S, Susitaival P, Hasan T, Gruvberger B, Williams J, Beck M, Bruze M (2010) Sensitization to dimethyl fumarate with multiple concurrent patch test reactions. Contact Derm 62(2): 88–96. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0536.2009. 01662.x   
Lee MY (2018) Essential oils as repellents against arthropods. Biomed Res Int ":"2018:6860271. https://doi. org/10.1155/2018/6860271   
Leroux P, Fritz R, Debieu D, Albertini C, Lanen C, Bach J, Gredt M, Chapeland F (2002) Mechanisms of resistance to fungicides in field strains of Botrytis cinerea. Pest Manag Sci 58(9):876–888. https://doi.org/10. 1002/ps.566   
Liden C (1990) Facial dermatitis caused by chlorothalonil in a paint. Contact Derm 22(4):206–211   
Mark KA, Brancaccio RR, Soter NA, Cohen DE (1999) Allergic contact and photoallergic contact dermatitis to plant and pesticide allergens. Arch Dermatol 135(1): 67–70   
Marzulli FN, Maibach HI (1974) Antimicrobials: experimental contact sensitization in man. J Soc Cosmet Chem 24(7):399–421   
Mathias CG (1983) Persistent contact dermatitis from the insecticide dichlorvos. Contact Derm 9(3):217–218   
McBride JS, Altman DG, Klein M, White W (1998) Green tobacco sickness. Tob Control 7(3):294–298   
McCarl GW (1975) Letter: comments and questions on the neurotoxicity of hexachlorophene. Pediatrics 55(5): 742–744   
Mikoczy Z, Tinnerberg H, Bjork J, Albin M (2011) Cancer incidence and mortality in Swedish sterilant workers exposed to ethylene oxide: updated cohort study findings 1972–2006. Int J Environ Res Public Health 8(6): 2009–2019. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph8062009   
Mitchell JC, Dupuis G, Towers GH (1972) Allergic contact dermatitis from pyrethrum (Chrysanthemum spp.). The roles of pyrethrosin, a sesquiterpene lactone, and of pyrethrin II. Br J Dermatol 86(6):568–573   
Nagy L, Orosz M (1984) Occupational asthma due to hexachlorophene. Thorax 39(8):630–631   
Nater JP, Grosfeld JC (1979) Allergic contact dermatitis from Betanal (phenmedipham). Contact Derm 5(1):59–60   
Newhouse M, McEvoy D, Rosenthal D (1978) Percutaneous paraquat absorption. An association with cutaneous lesions and respiratory failure. Arch Dermatol 114(10): 1516–1519   
NIOSH (2017) Pesticide illness and injury surveillance. NIOSH, Atlanta   
Nosbaum A, Vocanson M, Rozieres A, Hennino A, Nicolas JF (2009) Allergic and irritant contact dermatitis. Eur J Dermatol 19(4):325–332. https://doi.org/10.1684/ejd. 2009.0686   
O’Malley M (2010) Chapter 28: Regulatory evaluation of the skin effects of pesticides. In: Krieger R (ed) Hayes’ handbook of pesticide toxicology, vol 1, 3rd edn. Academic, Amsterdam, p 2000   
spiepr A3B2 tlsb $\scriptstyle 1 = - 0 . 0$ 1wO’Malley MA, Carpenter AV, Sweeney MH, Fingerhut MA, Marlow DA, Halperin WE, Mathias CG (1990) Chloracne associated with employment in the production of pentachlorophenol. Am J Ind Med 17(4):411–421   
O’Malley M, Rodriguez P, Maibach HI (1995) Pesticide patch testing: California nursery workers and controls. Contact Derm 32(1):61–63   
O’Malley M, Barry T, Verder-Carlos M, Rubin A (2004) Modeling of methyl isothiocyanate air concentrations associated with community illnesses following a metam-sodium sprinkler application. Am J Ind Med 46(1):1–15. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.20037   
spiepr A3B2 tlsb $\scriptstyle 1 = - 0 . 0 1$ wO’Malley M, Barry T, Ibarra M, Verder-Carlos M, Mehler L (2005) Illnesses related to shank application of metam-sodium, Arvin, California, 2002. J Agromedicine 10(4):27–42. https://doi.org/10. 1300/J096v10n04_06   
Ogueta IA, Brared Christensson J, Giménez-Arnau E, Brans R, Wilkinson M, Stingeni L, Foti C, Aerts O, Svedman C, Gonçalo M, Giménez-Arnau A (2022) Limonene and linalool hydroperoxides review: pros and cons for routine patch testing. Contact Derm 87 (1):1–12. https://doi.org/10.1111/cod.14064   
Osimitz TG, Franzosa JA, Maibach HI (2009) Pyrethrins and pyrethrosin content in commercial allergen extracts. Dermatitis 20(6):338–340   
Parsons PP (2001) Mammalian toxicokinetics and toxicity of chlorothalonil. In: Handbook of pesticide toxicology. Academic, San Diego   
Paulsen E (1998) Occupational dermatitis in Danish gardeners and greenhouse workers (II). Etiological factors. Contact Derm 38(1):14–19   
Penagos HG (2002) Contact dermatitis caused by pesticides among banana plantation workers in Panama. Int J Occup Environ Health 8(1):14–18. https://doi.org/10. 1179/oeh.2002.8.1.14   
Penagos H, O’Malley M, Maibach HI (2000) Pesticide Dermatoses. CRC Press, Boca Raton   
Penagos H, Ruepert C, Partanen T, Wesseling C (2004) Pesticide patch test series for the assessment of allergic contact dermatitis among banana plantation workers in Unna boots in four patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 33(5 Pt 2):906–908   
Ramu J, Konak T, Paule MG, Hanig JP, Liachenko S (2016) Longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging of the rat brain after hexachlorophene exposure. Neurotoxicology 56:225–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.neuro.2016.08.011   
Rose AL, Wisniewski HM, Cammer W (1975) Neurotoxicity of hexachlorophene: new pathological and biochemical observations. J Neurol Sci 24(4):425–435   
Saleeon T, Siriwong W, Maldonado-Perez HL, Robson MG (2015) Green tobacco sickness among Thai traditional tobacco farmers, Thailand. Int J Occup Environ Med 6(3):169–176   
Saunders LD, Ames RG, Knaak JB, Jackson RJ (1987) Outbreak of Omite-CR-induced dermatitis among orange pickers in Tulare County. California J Occup Med 29(5):409–413   
Schubert S, Geier J, Brans R, Heratizadeh A, Kränke B, Schnuch A, Bauer A, Dickel H, Buhl T, Vieluf D, Wagner N, Worm M, IVDK (2023) Patch testing hydroperoxides of limonene and linalool in consecutive patients-results of the IVDK 2018-2020. Contact Derm 89(2):85–94. https://doi.org/10.1111/cod.14332   
Sharma VK, Kaur S (1990) Contact sensitization by pesticides in farmers. Contact Derm 23(2):77–80   
Shuman RM, Leech RW, Alvord EC Jr (1974) Neurotoxicity of hexachlorophene in the human: I. A clinicopathologic study of 248 children. Pediatrics 54(6):689– 695   
Silvestre JF, Mercader P, Giménez-Arnau AM (2010) Dermatitis de contacto por dimetilfumarato [Contact dermatitis due to dimethyl fumarate]. Actas Dermosifiliogr 101(3):217–222   
Smith JG (1988) Paraquat poisoning by skin absorption: a review. Hum Toxicol 7(1):15–19   
Smith CR (1991) Dissipation of dislodgeable propargite residues on nectarine foliage. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 46(4):507–511   
Spencer J, O’Malley M (2006) Pyrethroid illnesses in California, 1996–2002. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 186:57–72   
Steenland K, Stayner L, Deddens J (2004) Mortality analyses in a cohort of 18 235 ethylene oxide exposed workers: follow up extended from 1987 to 1998. Occup Environ Med 61(1):2–7   
Sukakul T, Bruze M, Mowitz M, Antelmi A, Bergendorff O, Björk J, Dahlin J, Hamnerius N, Hauksson I, Isaksson M, Lejding T, Pontén A, Svedman C (2022) Contact allergy to oxidized linalool and oxidized limonene: patch testing in consecutive patients with dermatitis. Contact Derm 86(1):15–24. https://doi.org/10.1111/cod.13980   
Susitaival P, Winhoven SM, Williams J, Lammintausta K, Hasan T, Beck MH, Gruvberger B, Zimerson E, Bruze M (2010) An outbreak of furniture related dermatitis (‘sofa dermatitis’) in Finland and the UK: history and clinical cases. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 24(4): 486–489. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2009. 03429.x   
Tomlin CDS (ed) (1997) The pesticide manual: a world compendium, 11th edn. British Crop Protection Council Farnham, Surrey   
Tucker SB, Flannigan SA, Ross CE (1984) Inhibition of cutaneous paresthesia resulting from synthetic pyrethroid exposure. Int J Dermatol 23(10):686–689   
U.S. EPA (1999) Reregistration eligibility decision (RED) – Chlorothalonil, Washington, DC   
U.S. EPA (2013) Chapter 7: precautionary statements. In: Label review manual. https://www.epa.gov/pesticideregistration/label-review-manual   
U.S. EPA (2024) Pesticides industry sales and usage 2008–2012 market estimates. Office of Pesticide Programs, Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention, Washington, DC   
Underhill FP (1919) The physiology and experimental treatment of poisoning with the lethal war gases. Arch Intern Med 23:753–770   
Verder-Carlos M, O’Malley M (2002) Evaluating pesticide effects on ecosystems and human health: the rotenone application at Lake Davis. In: Managing healthy ecosystems, proceedings of symposium on ecotoxicology and ecosystem health. CRC Press, Boca Raton   
Verma G, Sharma NL, Shanker V, Mahajan VK, Tegta GR (2007) Pesticide contact dermatitis in fruit and vegetable farmers of Himachal Pradesh (India). Contact Derm 57(5):316–320. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0536. 2007.01229.x   
Vieira-Brock PL, Vaughan BM, Vollmer DL (2017) Comparison of antimicrobial activities of natural essential oils and synthetic fragrances against selected environmental pathogens. Biochimie Open 5:8–13. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.biopen.2017.09.001   
Wang JD, Li WE, Hu FC, Hu KH (1987) Occupational risk and the development of premalignant skin lesions among paraquat manufacturers. Br J Ind Med 44(3): 196–200   
Weisenburger DD (2021) A review and update with perspective of evidence that the herbicide glyphosate (roundup) is a cause of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 21(9):621–630. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.clml.2021.04.009   
Wesseling C, Hogstedt C, Picado A, Johansson L (1997) Unintentional fatal paraquat poisonings among agricultural workers in Costa Rica: report of 15 cases. Am J Ind Med 32(5):433–441   
Zhang L, Rana I, Shaffer RM, Taioli E, Sheppard L (2019) Exposure to glyphosate-based herbicides and risk for non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a meta-analysis and supporting evidence. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res 781: 186–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2019.02.001   
Zhou Q, Kan B, Jian X, Zhang W, Liu H, Zhang Z (2013) Paraquat poisoning by skin absorption: two case reports and a literature review. Exp Ther Med 6(6): 1504–1506. https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2013.1320