# (R) ENANTIOMERS OF CARBOXAMIDES FOR CONTROLLING OF HARMFUL MICROORGANISMS OR FOR ENHANCING PLANT HEALTH

## Abstract

The present invention relates to (R)-enantiomers of certain carboxamides, to compositions comprising these (R)-enantiomers, to a process for preparing these enantiomers and to the use for controlling of harmful microorganisms and for enhancing plant health in conventionally bred or transgenic plants of the Phaseoleae tribe, in particular conventionally bred or transgenic soybean.

## Full Description

The present invention relates to (R)-enantiomers of certain carboxamides, to compositions comprising these (R)-enantiomers, to a process for preparing these enantiomers and to the use for controlling of harmful microorganisms and for enhancing plant health in conventionally bred or transgenic plants of the Phaseoleae tribe, in particular conventionally bred or transgenic soybean.
wherein R1 represents a hydrogen atom or a methyl group and R2 represents a methyl group, a difluoromethyl group or a trifluoromethyl group are known as active compounds having a fungicidal effect (cf. WO 1986/02641 A, WO 1992/12970 A, JP 2010-83869, WO 20111/62397 A).
The carboxamides described have one chirality center and, if further centres of chirality are absent, two enantiomers having the R- or the S-configuration at the carbon atom (optical antipodes) are thus formed according to formula (I) as shown below
wherein R1 and R2 are defined as above.
In customary chemical syntheses from achiral starting materials, both enantiomers are formed in identical amounts, and a racemate is therefore present. However, the prior art does not report any fungicidal action in plant of the Phaseoleae tribe of the individual enantiomers. It is only reported, that a plant disease control composition comprising a mixture of the two enantiomers in certain ratio has fungicidal activity (WO2011/62397).
Plants of the Phaseoleae tribe belong to the economically important legume family. This group includes many of the beans cultivated for human and animal food, most importantly from the genera Phaseolus and Vigna.
Soybean (genus Glycine) is considered to be an important crop of the Phaseoleae tribe and is highly valued by world agriculture. Therefore, one of the major objectives of the soybean breeders is to develop more stable, productive and disease-resistant varieties. The basic motivation is to maximize grain yield for human and animal consumption. In order to attain said objects, the breeder usually selects varieties having superior traits.
Asian soybean rust (ASR), caused by the fungus Phakopsora pachyrhizi, is considered to be the most destructive soybean leaf disease (Miles, M. R.; Frederick R. D.; Hartman, G. (2003) Soybean rust: Is the U.S. soybean crop at risk? Online. APSnet Feature, American Phytopathological Society). The disease spreads by windblown uredospores which consequently let to long-distance dispersal to new, rust-free regions. Therefore, ASR has already caused losses in many soybean-growing regions of the world. The impact of the pathogen on productivity is drastic: up to 80% yield loss was observed in some regions (Yorinori J. T. (2004) Ferrugem “asiática” da soja no Brasil: evolução, importância econômica e controle. In: Junior J. N. Lazzarotto J. J. (eds.) Documentos 247. Embrapa, Londrina, Brazil, 36).
In order to control the disease, fungicides are applied or resistant or tolerant varieties are used.
The application of fungicides commonly bears the problem of unfavorable environmental or toxicological effects due to high dosage rates which are needed to effectively control the disease.
Fungus resistance is known to naturally occur in genotypes of the Glycine genus (Burdon, J. J.; Marshall, D. R. (1981) Evaluation of Australian native species of Glycine canescens, a wild relative of soybean. Theoretical Applied Genetics, 65: 44-45; Burdon, J. J. (1988) Major gene resistance to Phakopsora pachyrhizi in Glycine canescens, a wild relative of soybean. Theoretical Applied Genetics, 75: 923-928). Five qualitative dominant resistance genes have been identified (Meyer J. D. F., et al., (2009) Identification and analyses of candidate genes for rpp4-mediated resistance to ASR in soybean, Plant Physiology, 150: 295-307; Oloka H. K.; Tukamuhabwa P. (2008) Reaction of exotic soybean germplasm to Phakopsora pachyrhizi in Uganda, Plant Disease, 92: 1493-1496): rpp1 in PI200492 (McLean, R. J.; Byth, D. E. (1980) Inheritance of resistance to rust (Phakopsora pachyrhizi) in soybean. Australian Joumal Agricultural research, 31: 951-956); rpp2 in PI230970 (Bromfield, K. R.; Hartwig E. E. (1980) Resistance to soybean rust and mode of inheritance. Crop Science, 20: 254-255); rpp3 in PI 462312 (Bromfield K. R.; Melching, J. S. (1982) Sources of specific resistance to soybean rust. Phytopathology, 72: 706); rpp4 in PI 459025 (Hartwig R. R. (1986) Identification of a fourth major gene conferring to resistance to soybean rust. Crop Science, 26: 1135-1136) and rpp5 (Meyer J. D. F. (2009) Identification and analyses of candidate genes for Rpp4-mediated resistance to Asian Soybean Rust in soybean. Plant Physiol 150: 295-307). The resistance presented by each gene is limited to the specific pathogen variety and can be overcome in a short period of time due to the coevolution of host resistance and pathogen virulence. Even though there are soybean varieties that have superior traits, e.g. ASR tolerance, they are not fully resistant but still only tolerant to said disease.
It has now surprisingly found out that the (R) enantiomers according to formula (I-(R))
wherein in the compounds of the general formula (I-(R)) the specific residues have the following meaning: R1 represents a hydrogen atom or a methyl group and R2 represents a methyl group, a difluoromethyl group or a trifluoromethyl group have a superior efficiency against harmful microorganisms, in particular phytopathogenic fungi and is suitable for enhancing plant health in conventionally bred or transgenic plants of the Phaseoleae tribe, in particular soybean as compared to mixtures comprising the (S) and (R) enantiomers as known from prior art.
The racemic mixture of the compounds of the formula (I) are known from prior art; preparation of the compounds thereof is described for example in (cf. WO 1986/02641 A, WO 1992/12970 A, JP 2010-83869, WO 2011162397 A).
Taking the preferred definitions of the substituents R1 and R2 mentioned above into consideration, the compound of the general formula (I-(R)) is selected from one of the following compounds
Preferably, the compound of the general formula (I) is selected from compound (I-1(R)), (I-2(R)), and (I-5(R)).
More preferably, the compound of the general formula (I) is selected from compound (I-1(R)).
Although the mixture according to the present invention may be a composition itself, the final used composition is usually prepared by mixing the compounds of the formula (I-(R)) and an inert carrier, and if necessary, by adding a surfactant and/or another auxiliary for formulation, such as an extender, and by formulating the mixture into oil formulation, emulsifiable concentrate, flowable formulation, wettable powder, water dispersible granules, powder, granules, or the like. The formulation, which is used alone or by adding another inert component, can be used as a pesticide.
Specific further components of this final composition are described later.
The “composition” can be prepared by formulating the compounds of the formula (I-(R)) and then making the formulations or their diluents.
For the sake of clearness, a mixture means a physical combination of the compounds of the formula (I-(R)) whereas a composition means a combination of the mixture together with further additives, such as surfactants, solvents, carriers, pigments, antifoams, thickeners and extenders, in a form as suitable for agrochemical application.
Accordingly, the present invention also relates compositions for controlling harmful microorganisms, especially harmful fungi and bacteria, comprising an effective and non-phytotoxic amount of the inventive mixtures. These are preferably fungicidal compositions which comprise agriculturally suitable auxiliaries, solvents, carriers, surfactants or extenders.

In the context of the present invention, “control of harmful microorganisms” means a reduction in infestation by harmful microorganisms, compared with the untreated plant measured as fungicidal efficacy, preferably a reduction by 25-50%, compared with the untreated plant (100%), more preferably a reduction by 40-79%, compared with the untreated plant (100%); even more preferably, the infection by harmful microorganisms is entirely suppressed (by 70-100%). The control may be curative, i.e. for treatment of already infected plants, or protective, for protection of plants which have not yet been infected.
An “effective but non-phytotoxic amount” means an amount of the inventive composition which is sufficient to control the fungal disease of the plant in a satisfactory manner or to eradicate the fungal disease completely, and which, at the same time, does not cause any significant symptoms of phytotoxicity. In general, this application rate may vary within a relatively wide range. It depends on several factors, for example on the fungus to be controlled, the plant, the climatic conditions and the ingredients of the inventive compositions.
The present invention also relates to a method for controlling harmful microorganisms, comprising contacting said microrganisms or their habitat with the above-described composition.
The present invention relates further to a method for treating seeds plants of the Phaseoleae tribe, in particular conventionally bred or transgenic soybean, comprising contacting said seeds with the above-described composition.
Finally, the present invention also relates to seed treated with the above-mentioned composition
Suitable organic solvents include all polar and non-polar organic solvents usually employed for formulation purposes. Preferable the solvents are selected from ketones, e.g. methyl-isobutyl-ketone and cyclohexanone, amides, e.g. dimethyl formamide and alkanecarboxylic acid amides, e.g. N,N-dimethyl decaneamide and N,N-dimethyl octanamide, furthermore cyclic solvents, e.g. N-methyl-pyrrolidone, N-octyl-pyrrolidone, N-dodecylpyrrolidone, N-octyl-caprolactame, N-dodecyl-caprolactame and butyrolactone, furthermore strong polar solvents, e.g. dimethylsulfoxide, and aromatic hydrocarbons, e.g. xylol, Solvesso™, mineral oils, e.g. white spirit, petroleum, alkyl benzenes and spindle oil, also esters, e.g. propyleneglycol-monomethylether acetate, adipic acid dibutylester, acetic acid hexylester, acetic acid heptylester, citric acid tri-n-butylester and phthalic acid di-n-butylester, and also alkohols, e.g. benzyl alcohol and 1-methoxy-2-propanol.
According to the invention, a carrier is a natural or synthetic, organic or inorganic substance with which the active ingredients are mixed or combined for better applicability, in particular for application to plants or plant parts or seed. The carrier, which may be solid or liquid, is generally inert and should be suitable for use in agriculture.
Useful solid or liquid carriers include: for example ammonium salts and natural rock dusts, such as kaolins, clays, talc, chalk, quartz, attapulgite, montmorillonite or diatomaceous earth, and synthetic rock dusts, such as finely divided silica, alumina and natural or synthetic silicates, resins, waxes, solid fertilizers, water, alcohols, especially butanol, organic solvents, mineral and vegetable oils, and derivatives thereof. Mixtures of such carriers can likewise be used.
Suitable solid filler and carrier include inorganic particles, e.g. carbonates, silikates, sulphates and oxides with an average particle size of between 0.005 and 20 μm, preferably of between 0.02 to 10 μm, for example ammonium sulphate, ammonium phosphate, urea, calcium carbonate, calcium sulphate, magnesium sulphate, magnesium oxide, aluminium oxide, silicium dioxide, so-called fine-particle silica, silica gels, natural or synthetic silicates, and alumosilicates and plant products like cereal flour, wood powder/sawdust and cellulose powder.
Useful solid carriers for granules include: for example crushed and fractionated natural rocks such as calcite, marble, pumice, sepiolite, dolomite, and synthetic granules of inorganic and organic meals, and also granules of organic material such as sawdust, coconut shells, maize cobs and tobacco stalks.
Useful liquefied gaseous extenders or carriers are those liquids which are gaseous at standard temperature and under standard pressure, for example aerosol propellants such as halohydrocarbons, and also butane, propane, nitrogen and carbon dioxide.
In the formulations, it is possible to use tackifiers such as carboxymethylcellulose, and natural and synthetic polymers in the form of powders, granules or latices, such as gum arabic, polyvinyl alcohol and polyvinyl acetate, or else natural phospholipids, such as cephalins and lecithins, and synthetic phospholipids. Further additives may be mineral and vegetable oils.
If the extender used is water, it is also possible to employ, for example, organic solvents as auxiliary solvents. Useful liquid solvents are essentially: aromatics such as xylene, toluene or alkylnaphthalenes, chlorinated aromatics and chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons such as chlorobenzenes, chloroethylenes or dichloromethane, aliphatic hydrocarbons such as cyclohexane or paraffins, for example mineral oil fractions, mineral and vegetable oils, alcohols such as butanol or glycol and their ethers and esters, ketones such as acetone, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone or cyclohexanone, strongly polar solvents such as dimethylformamide and dimethyl sulphoxide, and also water.
The inventive compositions may additionally comprise further components, for example surfactants. Useful surfactants are emulsifiers and/or foam formers, dispersants or wetting agents having ionic or nonionic properties, or mixtures of these surfactants. Examples of these are salts of polyacrylic acid, salts of lignosulphonic acid, salts of phenolsulphonic acid or naphthalenesulphonic acid, polycondensates of ethylene oxide with fatty alcohols or with fatty acids or with fatty amines, substituted phenols (preferably alkylphenols or arylphenols), salts of sulphosuccinic esters, taurine derivatives (preferably alkyl taurates), phosphoric esters of polyethoxylated alcohols or phenols, fatty esters of polyols, and derivatives of the compounds containing sulphates, sulphonates and phosphates, for example alkylaryl polyglycol ethers, alkylsulphonates, alkylsulphates, arylsulphonates, protein hydrolysates, lignosulphite waste liquors and methylcellulose. The presence of a surfactant is necessary if one of the active ingredients and/or one of the inert carriers is insoluble in water and when application is effected in water. The proportion of surfactants is between 5 and 40 percent by weight of the inventive composition.

Suitable surfactants (adjuvants, emulsifiers, dispersants, protective colloids, wetting agent and adhesive) include all common ionic and non-ionic substances, for example ethoxylated nonylphenols, polyalkylene glycolether of linear or branched alcohols, reaction products of alkyl phenols with ethylene oxide and/or propylene oxide, reaction products of fatty acid amines with ethylene oxide and/or propylene oxide, furthermore fattic acid esters, alkyl sulfonates, alkyl sulphates, alkyl ethersulphates, alkyl etherphosphates, arylsulphate, ethoxylated arylalkylphenols, e.g. tristyryl-phenol-ethoxylates, furthermore ethoxylated and propoxylated arylalkylphenols like sulphated or phosphated arylalkylphenol-ethoxylates and -ethoxy- and -propoxylates. Further examples are natural and synthetic, water soluble polymers, e.g. lignosulphonates, gelatine, gum arabic, phospholipides, starch, hydrophobic modified starch and cellulose derivatives, in particular cellulose ester and cellulose ether, further polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinyl acetate, polyvinyl pyrrolidone, polyacrylic acid, polymethacrylic acid and co-polymerisates of (meth)acrylic acid and (meth)acrylic acid esters, and further co-polymerisates of methacrylic acid and methacrylic acid esters which are neutralized with alkalimetal hydroxide and also condensation products of optionally substituted naphthalene sulfonic acid salts with formaldehyde.
It is possible to use dyes such as inorganic pigments, for example iron oxide, titanium oxide and Prussian Blue, and organic dyes such as alizarin dyes, azo dyes and metal phthalocyanine dyes, and trace nutrients such as salts of iron, manganese, boron, copper, cobalt, molybdenum and zinc.
Antifoams which may be present in the formulations include e.g. silicone emulsions, longchain alcohols, fattiy acids and their salts as well as fluoroorganic substances and mixtures therof.
Examples of thickeners are polysaccharides, e.g. xanthan gum or veegum, silicates, e.g. attapulgite, bentonite as well as fine-particle silica.
If appropriate, it is also possible for other additional components to be present, for example protective colloids, binders, adhesives, thickeners, thixotropic substances, penetrants, stabilizers, sequestrants, complexing agents. In general, the active ingredients can be combined with any solid or liquid additive commonly used for formulation purposes.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions thereof can be used as such or, depending on their particular physical and/or chemical properties, in the form of their formulations or the use forms prepared therefrom, such as aerosols, capsule suspensions, cold-fogging concentrates, warm-fogging concentrates, encapsulated granules, fine granules, flowable concentrates for the treatment of seed, ready-to-use solutions, dustable powders, emulsifiable concentrates, oil-in-water emulsions, water-in-oil emulsions, macrogranules, microgranules, oil-dispersible powders, oil-miscible flowable concentrates, oil-miscible liquids, gas (under pressure), gas generating product, foams, pastes, pesticide coated seed, suspension concentrates, suspoemulsion concentrates, soluble concentrates, suspensions, wettable powders, soluble powders, dusts and granules, water-soluble and water-dispersible granules or tablets, water-soluble and water-dispersible powders for the treatment of seed, wettable powders, natural products and synthetic substances impregnated with active ingredient, and also microencapsulations in polymeric substances and in coating materials for seed, and also ULV cold-fogging and warm-fogging formulations.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions include not only formulations which are already ready for use and can be applied with a suitable apparatus to the plant or the seed, but also commercial concentrates which have to be diluted with water prior to use. Customary applications are for example dilution in water and subsequent spraying of the resulting spray liquor, application after dilution in oil, direct application without dilution, seed treatment or soil application of granules.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers, compositions and formulations generally contain between 0.05 and 99% by weight, 0.01 and 98% by weight, preferably between 0.1 and 95% by weight, more preferably between 0.5 and 90% of active ingredient, most preferably between 10 and 70% by weight. For special applications, e.g. for protection of wood and derived timber products the inventive mixtures, compositions and formulations generally contain between 0.0001 and 95% by weight, preferably 0.001 to 60% by weight of active ingredient.
The contents of active (R)-enantiomers in the application forms prepared from the formulations may vary in a broad range. The concentration of the active ingredients in the application forms is generally between 0.000001 to 95% by weight, preferably between 0.0001 and 2% by weight.
The formulations mentioned can be prepared in a manner known per se, for example by mixing the active ingredients with at least one customary extender, solvent or diluent, adjuvant, emulsifier, dispersant, and/or binder or fixative, wetting agent, water repellent, if appropriate desiccants and UV stabilizers and, if appropriate, dyes and pigments, antifoams, preservatives, inorganic and organic thickeners, adhesives, gibberellins and also further processing auxiliaries and also water. Depending on the formulation type to be prepared further processing steps are necessary, e.g. wet grinding, dry grinding and granulation.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions may be present as such or in their (commercial) formulations and in the use forms prepared from these formulations as a mixture with other (known) active ingredients, such as insecticides, attractants, sterilants, bactericides, acaricides, nematicides, fungicides, growth regulators, herbicides, fertilizers, safeners and/or semiochemicals.
The inventive treatment of the plants and plant parts with the mixtures or compositions is effected directly or by action on their surroundings, habitat or storage space by the customary treatment methods, for example by dipping, spraying, atomizing, irrigating, evaporating, dusting, fogging, broadcasting, foaming, painting, spreading-on, watering (drenching), drip irrigating and, in the case of propagation material, especially in the case of seeds, also by dry seed treatment, wet seed treatment, slurry treatment, incrustation, coating with one or more coats, etc. It is also possible to deploy the mixtures or compositions by the ultra-low volume method or to inject the mixtures or compositions preparation or the (R)-enantiomers or compositions itself into the soil.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions have potent microbicidal activity and can be used for control of harmful microorganisms, such as phytopathogenic fungi and bacteria, in crop protection and in the protection of materials.
The invention also relates to a method for controlling harmful microorganisms, characterized in that the inventive mixtures or compositions are applied to the phytopathogenic fungi, phytopathogenic bacteria and/or their habitat.
Fungicides can be used in crop protection for control of phytopathogenic fungi. They are characterized by an outstanding efficacy against a broad spectrum of phytopathogenic fungi, including soilborne pathogens, which are in particular members of the classes Plasmodiophoromycetes, Peronosporomycetes (Syn. Oomycetes), Chytridiomycetes, Zygomycetes, Ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes and Deuteromycetes (Syn. Fungi impeifecti). Some fungicides are systemically active and can be used in plant protection as foliar, seed dressing or soil fungicide. Furthermore, they are suitable for combating fungi, which inter alia infest wood or roots of plant.
Bactericides can be used in crop protection for control of Pseudomonadaceae, Rhizobiaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Corynebacteriaceae and Streptomycetaceae.

Non-limiting examples of pathogens of fungal diseases which can be treated in accordance with the invention include:
diseases caused by powdery mildew pathogens, for example Blumeria species, for example Blumeria graminis; Podosphaera species, for example Podosphaera leucotricha; Sphaerotheca species, for example Sphaerotheca fuliginea; Uncinula species, for example Uncinula necator; diseases caused by rust disease pathogens, for example Gymnosporangium species, for example Gymnosporangium sabinae; Hemileia species, for example Hemileia vastatrix; Phakopsora species, for example Phakopsora pachyrhizi and Phakopsora meibomiae; Puccinia species, for example Puccinia recondite, P. triticina, P. graminis or P. striiformis; Uromyces species, for example Uromyces appendiculatus; diseases caused by pathogens from the group of the Oomycetes, for example Albugo species, for example Algubo candida; Bremia species, for example Bremia lactucae; Peronospora species, for example Peronospora pisi or P. brassicae; Phytophthora species, for example Phytophthora infestans; Plasmopara species, for example Plasmopara viticola; Pseudoperonospora species, for example Pseudoperonospora humuli or Pseudoperonospora cubensis; Pythium species, for example Pythium ultimum; leaf blotch diseases and leaf wilt diseases caused, for example, by Alternaria species, for example Alternaria solani; Cercospora species, for example Cercospora beticola; Cladiosporium species, for example Cladiosporium cucumerinum; Cochliobolus species, for example Cochliobolus sativus (conidia form: Drechslera, Syn: Helminthosporium), Cochliobolus miyabeanus; Colletotrichum species, for example Colletotrichum lindemuthanium; Cycloconium species, for example Cycloconium oleaginum; Diaporthe species, for example Diaporthe citri; Elsinoe species, for example Elsinoe fawcettii; Gloeosporium species, for example Gloeosporium laeticolor; Glomerella species, for example Glomerella cingulata; Guignardia species, for example Guignardia bidwelli; Leptosphaeria species, for example Leptosphaeria maculans, Leptosphaeria nodorum; Magnaporthe species, for example Magnaporthe grisea; Microdochium species, for example Microdochium nivale; Mycosphaerella species, for example Mycosphaerella graminicola, M. arachidicola and M. fijiensis; Phaeosphaeria species, for example Phaeosphaeria nodorum; Pyrenophora species, for example Pyrenophora teres, Pyrenophora tritici repentis; Ramularia species, for example Ramularia collo-cygni, Ramularia areola; Rhynchosporium species, for example Rhynchosporium secalis; Septoria species, for example Septoria apii, Septoria lycopersii; Typhula species, for example Typhula incarnate; Venturia species, for example Venturia inaequalis; root and stem diseases caused, for example, by Corticium species, for example Corticium graminearum; Fusarium species, for example Fusarium oxysporum; Gaeumannomyces species, for example Gaeumannomyces graminis; Rhizoctonia species, such as, for example Rhizoctonia solani; Sarocladium diseases caused for example by Sarocladium oryzae; Sclerotium diseases caused for example by Sclerotium oryzae; Tapesia species, for example Tapesia acuformis; Thielaviopsis species, for example Thielaviopsis basicola; ear and panicle diseases (including corn cobs) caused, for example, by Alternaria species, for example Alternaria spp.; Aspergillus species, for example Aspergillus flavus; Cladosporium species, for example Cladosporium cladosporioides; Claviceps species, for example Claviceps purpurea; Fusarium species, for example Fusarium culmorum; Gibberella species, for example Gibberella zeae; Monographella species, for example Monographella nivalis; Septoria species, for example Septoria nodorum; diseases caused by smut fungi, for example Sphacelotheca species, for example Sphacelotheca reiliana; Tilletia species, for example Tilletia caries, T. controversa; Urocystis species, for example Urocystis occulta; Ustilago species, for example Ustilago nuda, U. nuda tritici; fruit rot caused, for example, by Aspergillus species, for example Aspergillus flavus; Botrytis species, for example Botrytis cinerea; Penicillium species, for example Penicillium expansum and P. purpurogenum; Sclerotinia species, for example Sclerotinia sclerotiorum; Verticilium species, for example Verticilium alboatrum; seed and soilborne decay, mould, wilt, rot and damping-off diseases caused, for example, by Alternaria species, caused for example by Alternaria brassicicola; Aphanomyces species, caused for example by Aphanomyces euteiches; Ascochyta species, caused for example by Ascochyta lentis; Aspergillus species, caused for example by Aspergillus flavus; Cladosporium species, caused for example by Cladosporium herbarum; Cochliobolus species, caused for example by Cochliobolus sativus; (Conidiaform: Drechslera, Bipolaris Syn: Helminthosporium); Colletotrichum species, caused for example by Colletotrichum coccodes; Fusarium species, caused for example by Fusarium culmorum; Gibberella species, caused for example by Gibberella zeae; Macrophomina species, caused for example by Macrophomina phaseolina; Monographella species, caused for example by Monographella nivalis; Penicillium species, caused for example by Penicillium expansum; Phoma species, caused for example by Phoma lingam; Phomopsis species, caused for example by Phomopsis sojae; Phytophthora species, caused for example by Phytophthora cactorum; Pyrenophora species, caused for example by Pyrenophora graminea; Pyricularia species, caused for example by Pyricularia oryzae; Pythium species, caused for example by Pythium ultimum; Rhizoctonia species, caused for example by Rhizoctonia solani; Rhizopus species, caused for example by Rhizopus oryzae; Sclerotium species, caused for example by Sclerotium rolfsii; Septoria species, caused for example by Septoria nodorum; Typhula species, caused for example by Typhula incarnata; Verticillium species, caused for example by Verticillium dahliae; cancers, galls and witches' broom caused, for example, by Nectria species, for example Nectria galligena; wilt diseases caused, for example, by Monilinia species, for example Monilinia laxa; leaf blister or leaf curl diseases caused, for example, by Exobasidium species, for example Exobasidium vexans; Taphrina species, for example Taphrina deformans; decline diseases of wooden plants caused, for example, by Esca disease, caused for example by Phaemoniella clamydospora, Phaeoacremonium aleophilum and Fomitiporia mediterranea; Eutypa dyeback, caused for example by Eutypa lata; Ganoderma diseases caused for example by Ganoderma boninense; Rigidoporus diseases caused for example by Rigidoporus lignosus; diseases of flowers and seeds caused, for example, by Botrytis species, for example Botrytis cinerea; diseases of plant tubers caused, for example, by Rhizoctonia species, for example Rhizoctonia solani; Helminthosporium species, for example Helminthosporium solani; Club root caused, for example, by Plasmodiophora species, for example Plamodiophora brassicae; diseases caused by bacterial pathogens, for example Xanthomonas species, for example Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae; Pseudomonas species, for example Pseudomonas syringae pv. lachrymans; Envinia species, for example Envinia amylovora.
The following diseases of soya beans can be controlled with preference:

Fungal diseases on leaves, stems, pods and seeds caused, for example, by Alternaria leaf spot (Alternaria spec. atrans tenuissima), Anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporoides dematium var. truncatum), brown spot (Septoria glycines), cercospora leaf spot and blight (Cercospora kikuchii), choanephora leaf blight (Choanephora infundibulifera trispora (Syn.)), dactuliophora leaf spot (Dactuliophora glycines), downy mildew (Peronospora manshurica), drechslera blight (Drechslera glycini), frogeye leaf spot (Cercospora sojina), leptosphaerulina leaf spot (Leptosphaerulina trifolii), phyllostica leaf spot (Phyllosticta sojaecola), pod and stem blight (Phomopsis sojae), powdery mildew (Microsphaera diffusa), pyrenochaeta leaf spot (Pyrenochaeta glycines), rhizoctonia aerial, foliage, and web blight (Rhizoctonia solani), rust (Phakopsora pachyrhizi, Phakopsora meibomiae), scab (Sphaceloma glycines), stemphylium leaf blight (Stemphylium botryosum), target spot (Corynespora cassiicola).
Fungal diseases on roots and the stem base caused, for example, by black root rot (Calonectria crotalariae), charcoal rot (Macrophomina phaseolina), fusarium blight or wilt, root rot, and pod and collar rot (Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium orthoceras, Fusarium semitectum, Fusarium equiseti), mycoleptodiscus root rot (Mycoleptodiscus terrestris), neocosmospora (Neocosmospora vasinfecta), pod and stem blight (Diaporthe phaseolorum), stem canker (Diaporthe phaseolorum var. caulivora), phytophthora rot (Phytophthora megasperma), brown stem rot (Phialophora gregata), pythium rot (Pythium aphanidennatum, Pythium irregulare, Pythium debaryanum, Pythium myriotylum, Pythium ultimum), rhizoctonia root rot, stem decay, and damping-off (Rhizoctonia solani), sclerotinia stem decay (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum), sclerotinia southern blight (Sclerotinia rolfsii), thielaviopsis root rot (Thielaviopsis basicola).
The inventive fungicidal (R)-enantiomers or compositions can be used for curative or protective/preventive control of phytopathogenic fungi. The invention therefore also relates to curative and protective methods for controlling phytopathogenic fungi by the use of the inventive mixtures or compositions-, which are applied to the seed, the plant or plant parts, the fruit or the soil in which the plants grow.
The fact that the mixtures or compositions are well tolerated by plants at the concentrations required for controlling plant diseases allows the treatment of above-ground parts of plants, of propagation stock and seeds, and of the soil.
According to the invention all plants and plant parts can be treated. By plants is meant all plants and plant populations such as desirable and undesirable wild plants, cultivars and plant varieties (whether or not protectable by plant variety or plant breeder's rights). Cultivars and plant varieties can be plants obtained by conventional propagation and breeding methods which can be assisted or supplemented by one or more biotechnological methods such as by use of double haploids, protoplast fusion, random and directed mutagenesis, molecular or genetic markers or by bioengineering and genetic engineering methods. By plant parts is meant all above ground and below ground parts and organs of plants such as shoot, leaf, blossom and root, whereby for example leaves, needles, stems, branches, blossoms, fruiting bodies, fruits and seed as well as roots, corms and rhizomes are listed. Crops and vegetative and generative propagating material, for example cuttings, corms, rhizomes, runners and seeds also belong to plant parts.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions, when they are well tolerated by plants, have favourable homeotherm toxicity and are well tolerated by the environment, are suitable for protecting plants and plant organs, for enhancing harvest yields, for improving the quality of the harvested material. They can preferably be used as crop protection compositions. They are active against normally sensitive and resistant species and against all or some stages of development.
Plants of the tribe Phaseoleae which can be treated in accordance with the invention include the following main crop plants: Psoralea spp. Breadroot (prairie turnip), Apios americana (Potato bean; groundnut), Cajanus cajan (Pigeonpea), Canavalia ensiformis (Jack bean/velvet bean), Lablab purpureus (Hyacinth bean), Glycine max (Soybean), Pachyrhizus erosus Jicama/yam bean), Phaseolus coccineus (Scarlet runner bean), Phaseolus lunatus (Lima bean), Phaseolus vulgaris (Common bean), Phaseolus acutifolius (Tepary bean), Macrotyloma geocarpum (Hausa groundnut), Psophocarpus spp. (Winged bean), Vigna angularis (Adzuki bean), Vigna aconitifolia (Moth bean), Vigna mungo and radiata (Black gram; mung bean), Vigna subterranea(Bambara groundnut), Vigna unguiculata (Cowpea/black-eyed pea).; and in each case genetically modified types of these plants.
Soybeans are particularly preferred plants.
In particular, the mixtures and compositions according to the invention are suitable for controlling the following plant diseases:

Albugo spp. (white rust) on ornamental plants, vegetable crops (e.g. A. candida) and sunflowers (e.g. A. tragopogonis); Alternaria spp. (black spot disease, black blotch) on vegetables, oilseed rape (e.g. A. brassicola or A. brassicae), sugar beet (e.g. A. tenuis), fruit, rice, soybeans and also on potatoes (e.g. A. solani or A. alternata) and tomatoes (e.g. A. solani or A. alternata) and Alternaria spp. (black head) on wheat; Aphanomyces spp. on sugar beet and vegetables; Ascochyta spp. on cereals and vegetables, e.g. A. tritici (Ascochyta leaf blight) on wheat and A. hordei on barley; Bipolaris and Drechslera spp. (teleomorph: Cochliobolus spp.), e.g. leaf spot diseases (D. maydis and B. zeicola) on corn, e.g. glume blotch (B. sorokiniana) on cereals and e.g. B. oryzae on rice and on lawn; Blumeria (old name: Erysiphe) graminis (powdery mildew) on cereals (e.g. wheat or barley); Botryosphaeria spp. (‘Slack Dead Arm Disease’) on grapevines (e.g. B. obtusa); Botrytis cinerea (teleomorph: Botryotinia fuckeliana: gray mold, gray rot) on soft fruit and pomaceous fruit (inter alia strawberries), vegetables (inter alia lettuce, carrots, celeriac and cabbage), oilseed rape, flowers, grapevines, forest crops and wheat (ear mold); Bremia lactucae (downy mildew) on lettuce; Ceratocystis (syn. Ophiostoma) spp. (blue stain fungus) on deciduous trees and coniferous trees, e.g. C. ulmi (Dutch elm disease) on elms; Cercospora spp. (Cereospora leat spot) on corn (e.g. C. zeae-maydis), rice, sugar beet (e.g. C. beticola), sugar cane, vegetables, coffee, soybeans (e.g. C. sojina or C. kikuchil) and rice; Cladosporium spp. on tomato (e.g. C. fulvum: tomato leaf mold) and cereals, e.g. C. herbarum (ear rot) on wheat; Claviceps purpurea (ergot) on cereals; Cochliobolus (anamorph: Helminthosporium or Bipolaris) spp. (leaf spot) on corn (e.g. C. carbonum), cereals (e.g. C. sativus, anamorph: B. sorokiniana: glume blotch) and rice (tor example C. miyabeanus, anamorph: H. oryzae); Colletotrichum (teleomorph: Glomerella) spp. (anthracnosis) on cotton (e.g. C. gossypii), corn (e.g. C. graminicola: stem rot and anthracnosis), soft fruit, potatoes (e.g. C. coccodes: wilt disease), beans (e.g. C. lindemuthianum) and soybeans (e.g. C. truncatum); Corticium spp., e.g. C. sasakii (sheath blight) on rice; Corynespora cassiicola (leaf spot) on soybeans and ornamental plants; Cycloconium spp., e.g. C. oleaginum on olives; Cylindrocarpon spp. (e.g. fruit tree cancer or black foot disease of grapevine, teleomorph: Nectria or Neonectria spp.) on fruit trees, grapevines (e.g. C. liriodendn; teleomorph: Neonectria liriodendri, black foot disease) and many ornamental trees; Dematophora (teleomorph: Rosellinia) necatrix (root/stem rot) on soybeans; Diaporthe spp. e.g. D. phaseolorum (stem disease) on soybeans; Drechslera (syn. Helminthosporium, teleomorph: Pyrenophora) spp. on corn, cereals, such as barley (e.g. D. teres, net blotch) and on wheat (e.g. D. tritici-repentis: DTR leaf spot), rice and lawn; Esca disease (dieback of grapevine, apoplexia) on grapevines, caused by Formitiporia (syn. Phellinus) punctata, F mediterranea. Phaeomoniella chlamydospora (old name Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum), Phaeoacremonium aleophilum and/or Botryosphaeria obtusa; Elsinoe spp. on pome fruit (E. pyri) and soft fruit (E. veneta: anthracnosis) and also grapevines (E. ampelina: anthracnosis); Entyloma oryzae (Ieaf smut) on rice; Epicoccum spp. (black head) on wheat; Erysiphe spp. (powdery mildew) on sugar beet (E. betae), vegetables (e.g. E. pisi), such as cucumber species (e.g. E. cichoracearum) and cabbage species, such as oilseed rape (e.g. E. cruciferarum); Eutypa fata (Eutypa cancer or dieback, anamorph: Cytosporina lata, syn. Libertella blepharis) on fruit trees, grapevines and many ornamental trees; Exserohilum (syn. Helminthosporium) spp. on corn (e.g. E. turcicum); Fusarium (teleomorph: Gibberella) spp. (wilt disease, root and stem rot) on various plants, such as e.g. F. graminearum or F. culmorum (root rot and silver-top) on cereals (e.g. wheat or barley), F. oxysporum on tomatoes, F. solani on soybeans and F. verticillioides on corn; Gaeumannomyces graminis (takeall) on cereals (e.g. wheat or barley) and corn; Gibberella spp. on cereals (e.g. G. zeae) and rice (e.g. G. fujikuroi: bakanae disease); Glomerella cingulata on grapevines, pomaceous fruit and other plants and G. gossypii on cotton; grainstaining complex on rice; Guignardia bidwellii (black rot) on grapevines; Gymnosporangium spp. on Rosaceae and juniper, e.g. G. sabinae (pear rust) on pears; Helminthosporium spp. (syn. Drechslera, teleomorph: Cochliobolus) on corn, cereals and rice; Hemileia spp., e.g. H. vastatrix (coffee leaf rust) on coffee; Isariopsis clavispora (syn. Cladosporium vitis) on grapevines; Macrophomina phaseolina (syn. phaseoli) (root/stem rot) on soybeans and cotton; Microdochium (syn. Fusarium) nivale (pink snow mold) on cereals (e.g. wheat or barley); Microsphaera diffusa (powdery mildew) on soybeans; Monilinia spp., e.g. M. laxa. M. fructicola and M. fructigena (blossom and twig blight) on stone fruit and other Rosaceae; Mycosphaerella spp. on cereals, bananas, soft fruit and peanuts, such as e.g. M. graminicola (anamorph: Septoria tritici, Septoria leaf blotch) on wheat or M. fijiensis (Sigatoka disease) on bananas; Peronospora spp. (downy mildew) on cabbage (e.g. P. brassicae), oilseed rape (e.g. P. parasitica), bulbous plants (e.g. P. destructor), tobacco (P. tabacina) and soybeans (e.g. P. manshurica); Phakopsora pachyrhizi and P. meibomiae (soybean rust) on soybeans; Phialophora spp. e.g. on grapevines (e.g. P. tracheiphila and P. tetraspora) and soybeans (e.g. P. gregata: stem disease); Phoma lingam (root and stem rot) on oilseed rape and cabbage and P. betae (leaf spot) on sugar beet; Phomopsis spp. on sunflowers, grapevines (e.g. P. viticola: dead-arm disease) and soybeans (e.g. stem canker/stem blight: P. phaseoli, teleomorph: Diaporthe phaseolorum); Physoderma maydis (brown spot) on corn; Phytophthora spp. (wilt disease, root, leaf, stem and fruit rot) on various plants, such as on bell peppers and cucumber species (e.g. P. capsici), soybeans (e.g. P. megasperma, syn. P. sojae), potatoes and tomatoes (e.g. P. infestans. late blight and brown rot) and deciduous trees (e.g. P. ramorum sudden oak death); Plasmodiophora brassicae (club-root) on cabbage, oilseed rape, radish and other plants; Plasmopara spp., e.g. P. viticola (peronospora of grapevines, downy mildew) on grapevines and P. halstedii on sunflowers; Podosphaera spp. (powdery mildew) on Rosaceae, hops, pomaceaus fruit and soft fruit, e.g. P. leucotricha on apple; Polymyxa spp., e.g. on cereals, such as barley and wheat (P. graminis) and sugar beet (P. betae) and the viral diseases transmitted thereby; Pseudocercosporella herpotrichoides (eyespot/stem break, teleomorph: Tapesia yallundae) on cereals. e.g. wheat or barley; Pseudoperonospora (downy mildew) on various plants, e.g. P. cubensis on cucumber species or P. humili on hops; Pseudopezicula tracheiphila (angular leaf scorch, anamorph Phialophora) on grapevines; Puccinia spp. (rust disease) on various plants, e.g. P. triticina (brown rust of wheat), P. striiformis (yellow rust). P. hordei (dwarf leaf rust), P. graminis (black rust) or P. recondita (brown rust of rye) on cereals, such as e.g. wheat, barley or rye. P. kuehnii on sugar cane and, e.g., on asparagus (e.g. P. asparagi); Pyrenophora (anamorph: Drechslera) tritici-repentis (speckled leaf blotch) on wheat or P. teres (net blotch) on barley; Pyricularia spp., e.g. P. oryzae (teleomorph: Magnaporthe grisea. rice blast) on rice and P. grisea on lawn and cereals; Pythium spp. (damping-off disease) on lawn, rice, corn, wheat, cotton, oilseed rape, sunflowers, sugar beet, vegetables and other plants (e.g. P. ultimum or P. aphanidermatum); Ramularia spp., e.g. R. collo-cygni (Ramularia leaf and lawn spot/physiological leaf spot) on barley and R. beticola on sugar beet; Rhizoctonia spp. on cotton, rice, potatoes, lawn, corn, oilseed rape, potatoes, sugar beet, vegetables and on various other plants, for example R. solani (root and stern rot) on soybeans, R. solani (sheath blight) on rice or R. cerealis (sharp eyespot) on wheat or barley; Rhizopus stolonifer (soft rot) on strawberries, carrots, cabbage, grapevines and tomato; Rhynchosporium secalis (leaf spot) on barley, rye and triticale; Sarocladium oryzae and S. attenuatum (sheath rot) on rice; Sclerotinia spp. (stem or white rot) on vegetable and field crops, such as oilseed rape, sunflowers (e.g. Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) and soybeans (e.g. S. rolfsii), Septoria spp. on various plants, e.g. S. glycines (leaf spot) on soybeans, S. tritici (Septoria leaf blotch) on wheat and S. (syn. Stagonospora) nodorum (leaf blotch and glume blotch) on cereals; Uncinula (syn. Erysiphe) necator (powdery mildew, anamorph: Oidium tuckeri) on grapevines; Setospaeria spp. (leaf spot) on corn (e.g. S. turcicum, syn. Helminthosporium turcicum) and lawn; Sphacelotheca spp. (head smut) on corn, (e.g. S. reiliana: kernel smut), millet and sugar cane; Sphaerotheca fuliginea (powdery mildew) on cucumber species; Spongospora subterranea (powdery scab) on potatoes and the viral diseases transmitted thereby; Stagonospora spp. on cereals, e.g. S. nodorum (leaf blotch and glume blotch, teleomorph: Leptosphaeria [syn. Phaeosphaeria] nodorum) on wheat; Synchytrium endobioticum on potatoes (potato wart disease); Taphrina spp., e.g. T. deformans (curly-leaf disease) on peach and T. pruni (plum-pocket disease) on pi ums; Thielaviopsis spp. (black root rot) on tobacco, pome fruit, vegetable crops, soybeans and cotton, e.g. T. basicola (syn. Chalara elegans); Tilletia spp. (bunt or stinking smut) on cereals, such as e.g. T. tritici (syn. T. caries, wheat bunt) and T. controversa (dwarf bunt) on wheat; Typhula incarnate (gray snow mold) on barley or wheat; Urocystis spp., e.g. U. occulta (flag smut) on rye; Uromyces spp. (rust) on vegetable plants, such as beans (e.g. U. appendiculatus, syn. U. phaseoll) and sugar beet (e.g. U. betae); Ustilago spp. (loose smut) on cereals (e.g. U. nuda and U. avaenae), corn (e.g. U. maydis: corn smut) and sugar cane; Venturia spp. (scab) on apples (e.g. V. inaequalis) and pears and Verticillium spp. (leaf and shoot wilt) on various plants, such as fruit trees and ornamental trees, grapevines, soft fruit, vegetable and field crops, such as e.g. V. dahliae on strawberries, oilseed rape, potatoes and tomatoes.

The (R)-enantiomers and compositions according to the present inventions are in particular preferred for controlling the following plant diseases: Soybean diseases: Cercospora kikuchii, Elsinoe glycines, Diaporthe phaseolorum var. sojae, Septaria glycines, Cercospora sojina, Phakopsora pachyrhizi, Phytophthora sojae, Rhizoctonia solani, Corynespora casiicola, and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum.
The (R)-enantiomers and compositions according to the present inventions are very particularly preferred for controlling the following plant diseases: Soybean diseases: Phakopsora pachyrhizi.
The (R)-enantiomers and compositions according to the present inventions are suitable for enhancing plant health.
Enhancing plant health shall mean that the inventive (R)-enantiomers can be used as plant growth regulators as defined below, as plant strengthening/resistance inducing compound as defined below, for effecting plant physiology as defined below, and for increasing yield in crops as defined below.
In some cases, the inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions can, at particular concentrations or application rates, also be used as herbicides, safeners, growth regulators or agents to improve plant properties, or as microbicides, for example as fungicides, antimycotics, bactericides, viricides (including compositions against viroids) or as compositions against MLO (Mycoplasma-like organisms) and RLO (Rickettsia-like organisms). The (R)-enantiomers or compositions intervene in the metabolism of the plants and can therefore also be used as growth regulators.
Plant growth regulators may exert various effects on plants. The effect of the substances depends essentially on the time of application in relation to the developmental stage of the plant, and also on the amounts of active ingredient applied to the plants or their environment and on the type of application. In each case, growth regulators should have a particular desired effect on the crop plants.
Plant growth-regulating compounds can be used, for example, to inhibit the vegetative growth of the plants. Such inhibition of growth is of economic interest, for example, in the case of grasses, since it is thus possible to reduce the frequency of grass cutting in ornamental gardens, parks and sport facilities, on roadsides, at airports or in fruit crops. Also of significance is the inhibition of the growth of herbaceous and woody plants on roadsides and in the vicinity of pipelines or overhead cables, or quite generally in areas where vigorous plant growth is unwanted.
Also important is the use of growth regulators for inhibition of the longitudinal growth of cereal. This reduces or completely eliminates the risk of lodging of the plants prior to harvest. In addition, growth regulators in the case of cereals can strengthen the culm, which also counteracts lodging. The employment of growth regulators for shortening and strengthening culms allows the deployment of higher fertilizer volumes to increase the yield, without any risk of lodging of the cereal crop.
In many crop plants, inhibition of vegetative growth allows denser planting, and it is thus possible to achieve higher yields based on the soil surface. Another advantage of the smaller plants obtained in this way is that the crop is easier to cultivate and harvest.
Inhibition of the vegetative plant growth may also lead to enhanced yields because the nutrients and assimilates are of more benefit to flower and fruit formation than to the vegetative parts of the plants.
Frequently, growth regulators can also be used to promote vegetative growth. This is of great benefit when harvesting the vegetative plant parts. However, promoting vegetative growth may also promote generative growth in that more assimilates are formed, resulting in more or larger fruits.
In some cases, yield increases may be achieved by manipulating the metabolism of the plant, without any detectable changes in vegetative growth. In addition, growth regulators can be used to alter the composition of the plants, which in turn may result in an improvement in quality of the harvested products. For example, it is possible to increase the sugar content in sugar beet, sugar cane, pineapples and in citrus fruit, or to increase the protein content in soya or cereals. It is also possible, for example, to use growth regulators to inhibit the degradation of desirable ingredients, for example sugar in sugar beet or sugar cane, before or after harvest. It is also possible to positively influence the production or the elimination of secondary plant ingredients. One example is the stimulation of the flow of latex in rubber trees.
Under the influence of growth regulators, parthenocarpic fruits may be formed. In addition, it is possible to influence the sex of the flowers. It is also possible to produce sterile pollen, which is of great importance in the breeding and production of hybrid seed.
Use of growth regulators can control the branching of the plants. On the one hand, by breaking apical dominance, it is possible to promote the development of side shoots, which may be highly desirable particularly in the cultivation of ornamental plants, also in combination with an inhibition of growth. On the other hand, however, it is also possible to inhibit the growth of the side shoots. This effect is of particular interest, for example, in the cultivation of tobacco or in the cultivation of tomatoes.
Under the influence of growth regulators, the amount of leaves on the plants can be controlled such that defoliation of the plants is achieved at a desired time. Such defoliation plays a major role in the mechanical harvesting of cotton, but is also of interest for facilitating harvesting in other crops, for example in viticulture. Defoliation of the plants can also be undertaken to lower the transpiration of the plants before they are transplanted.
Growth regulators can likewise be used to regulate fruit dehiscence. On the one hand, it is possible to prevent premature fruit dehiscence. On the other hand, it is also possible to promote fruit dehiscence or even flower abortion to achieve a desired mass (“thinning”), in order to eliminate alternation. Alternation is understood to mean the characteristic of some fruit species, for endogenous reasons, to deliver very different yields from year to year Finally, it is possible to use growth regulators at the time of harvest to reduce the forces required to detach the fruits, in order to allow mechanical harvesting or to facilitate manual harvesting.
Growth regulators can also be used to achieve faster or else delayed ripening of the harvested material before or after harvest. This is particularly advantageous as it allows optimal adjustment to the requirements of the market. Moreover, growth regulators in some cases can improve the fruit colour. In addition, growth regulators can also be used to concentrate maturation within a certain period of time. This establishes the prerequisites for complete mechanical or manual harvesting in a single operation, for example in the case of tobacco, tomatoes or coffee.
By using growth regulators, it is additionally possible to influence the resting of seed or buds of the plants, such that plants such as pineapple or ornamental plants in nurseries, for example, germinate, sprout or flower at a time when they are normally not inclined to do so. In areas where there is a risk of frost, it may be desirable to delay budding or germination of seeds with the aid of growth regulators, in order to avoid damage resulting from late frosts.
Finally, growth regulators can induce resistance of the plants to frost, drought or high salinity of the soil. This allows the cultivation of plants in regions which are normally unsuitable for this purpose.

The (R)-enantiomers or compositions according to the invention also exhibit a potent strengthening effect in plants. Accordingly, they can be used for mobilizing the defences of the plant against attack by undesirable microorganisms.
Plant-strengthening (resistance-inducing) substances are to be understood as meaning, in the present context, those substances which are capable of stimulating the defence system of plants in such a way that the treated plants, when subsequently inoculated with harmful microorganisms, develop a high degree of resistance to these microorganisms.
The (R)-enantiomers according to the invention are also suitable for increasing the yield of crops. In addition, they show reduced toxicity and are well tolerated by plants.
The (R)-enantiomers according to the invention are also suitable for effecting plant physiology.
Further, in context with the present invention plant physiology effects comprise the following:
Abiotic stress tolerance, comprising temperature tolerance, drought tolerance and recovery after drought stress, water use efficiency (correlating to reduced water consumption), flood tolerance, ozone stress and UV tolerance, tolerance towards chemicals like heavy metals, salts, pesticides (safener) etc.
Biotic stress tolerance, comprising increased fungal resistance and increased resistance against nematodes, viruses and bacteria. In context with the present invention, biotic stress tolerance preferably comprises increased fungal resistance and increased resistance against nematodes
Increased plant vigor, comprising plant quality and seed vigor, reduced stand failure, improved appearance, increased recovery, improved greening effect and improved photosynthetic efficiency.
Effects on Plant Hormones and/or Functional Enzymes.
Effects on growth regulators (promoters), comprising earlier germination, better emergence, more developed root system and/or improved root growth, increased ability of tillering, more productive tillers, earlier flowering, increased plant height and/or biomass, shorting of stems, improvements in shoot growth, number of kernels/ear, number of ears/m2, number of stolons and/or number of flowers, enhanced harvest index, bigger leaves, less dead basal leaves, improved phyllotaxy, earlier maturation/earlier fruit finish, homogenous riping, increased duration of grain filling, better fruit finish, bigger fruit/vegetable size, sprouting resistance and reduced lodging.
Increased yield, referring to total biomass per hectare, yield per hectare, kernel/fruit weight, seed size and/or hectolitre weight as well as to increased product quality, comprising:
improved processability relating to size distribution (kernel, fruit, etc.), homogenous riping, grain moisture, better milling, better vinification, better brewing, increased juice yield, harvestability, digestibility, sedimentation value, falling number, pod stability, storage stability, improved fiber length/strength/uniformity, increase of milk and/or meet quality of silage fed animals, adaption to cooking and frying; further comprising improved marketability relating to improved fruit/grain quality, size distribution (kernel, fruit, etc.), increased storage/shelf-life, firmness/softness, taste (aroma, texture, etc.), grade (size, shape, number of berries, etc.), number of berries/fruits per bunch, crispness, freshness, coverage with wax, frequency of physiological disorders, colour, etc.; further comprising increased desired ingredients such as e.g. protein content, fatty acids, oil content, oil quality, aminoacid composition, sugar content, acid content (pH), sugar/acid ratio (Brix), polyphenols, starch content, nutritional quality, gluten content/index, energy content, taste, etc.; and further comprising decreased undesired ingredients such as e.g. less mycotoxines, less aflatoxines, geosmin level, phenolic aromas, lacchase, polyphenol oxidases and peroxidases, nitrate content etc.
Sustainable agriculture, comprising nutrient use efficiency, especially nitrogen (N)-use efficiency, phosphours (P)-use efficiency, water use efficiency, improved transpiration, respiration and/or CO2 assimilation rate, better nodulation, improved Ca-metabolism etc.
Delayed senescence, comprising improvement of plant physiology which is manifested, for example, in a longer grain filling phase, leading to higher yield, a longer duration of green leaf colouration of the plant and thus comprising colour (greening), water content, dryness etc. Accordingly, in the context of the present invention, it has been found that the specific inventive application of the active compound combination makes it possible to prolong the green leaf area duration, which delays the maturation (senescence) of the plant. The main advantage to the farmer is a longer grain filling phase leading to higher yield. There is also an advantage to the farmer on the basis of greater flexibility in the harvesting time.
Therein “sedimentation value” is a measure for protein quality and describes according to Zeleny (Zeleny value) the degree of sedimentation of flour suspended in a lactic acid solution during a standard time interval. This is taken as a measure of the baking quality. Swelling of the gluten fraction of flour in lactic acid solution affects the rate of sedimentation of a flour suspension. Both a higher gluten content and a better gluten quality give rise to slower sedimentation and higher Zeleny test values. The sedimentation value of flour depends on the wheat protein composition and is mostly correlated to the protein content, the wheat hardness, and the volume of pan and hearth loaves. A stronger correlation between loaf volume and Zeleny sedimentation volume compared to SDS sedimentation volume could be due to the protein content influencing both the volume and Zeleny value (Czech. J. Food Sci. Vol. 21, No. 3: 91-96, 2000).
Further the “falling number” as mentioned herein is a measure for the baking quality of cereals, especially of wheat. The falling number test indicates that sprout damage may have occurred. It means that changes to the physical properties of the starch portion of the wheat kernel has already happened. Therein, the falling number instrument analyzes viscosity by measuring the resistance of a flour and water paste to a falling plunger. The time (in seconds) for this to happen is known as the falling number. The falling number results are recorded as an index of enzyme activity in a wheat or flour sample and results are expressed in time as seconds. A high falling number (for example, above 300 seconds) indicates minimal enzyme activity and sound quality wheat or flour. A low falling number (for example, below 250 seconds) indicates substantial enzyme activity and sproutdamaged wheat or flour.
The term “more developed root system”/“improved root growth” refers to longer root system, deeper root growth, faster root growth, higher root dry/fresh weight, higher root volume, larger root surface area, bigger root diameter, higher root stability, more root branching, higher number of root hairs, and/or more root tips and can be measured by analyzing the root architecture with suitable methodologies and Image analysis programmes (e.g. WinRhizo).
The term “crop water use efficiency” refers technically to the mass of agriculture produce per unit water consumed and economically to the value of product(s) produced per unit water volume consumed and can e.g. be measured in terms of yield per ha, biomass of the plants, thousand-kernel mass, and the number of ears per m2.
The term “nitrogen-use efficiency” refers technically to the mass of agriculture produce per unit nitrogen consumed and economically to the value of product(s) produced per unit nitrogen consumed, reflecting uptake and utilization efficiency.

Improvement in greening/improved colour and improved photosynthetic efficiency as well as the delay of senescence can be measured with well-known techniques such as a HandyPea system (Hansatech). Fv/Fm is a parameter widely used to indicate the maximum quantum efficiency of photosystem II (PSII). This parameter is widely considered to be a selective indication of plant photosynthetic performance with healthy samples typically achieving a maximum Fv/Fm value of approx. 0.85. Values lower than this will be observed if a sample has been exposed to some type of biotic or abiotic stress factor which has reduced the capacity for photochemical quenching of energy within PSII. Fv/Fm is presented as a ratio of variable fluorescence (Fv) over the maximum fluorescence value (Fm). The Performance Index is essentially an indicator of sample vitality. (See e.g. Advanced Techniques in Soil Microbiology, 2007, 11, 319-341; Applied Soil Ecology, 2000, 15, 169-182.)
The improvement in greening/improved colour and improved photosynthetic efficiency as well as the delay of senescence can also be assessed by measurement of the net photosynthetic rate (Pn), measurement of the chlorophyll content, e.g. by the pigment extraction method of Ziegler and Ehle, measurement of the photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm ratio), determination of shoot growth and final root and/or canopy biomass, determination of tiller density as well as of root mortality.
Within the context of the present invention preference is given to improving plant physiology effects which are selected from the group comprising: enhanced root growth/more developed root system, improved greening, improved water use efficiency (correlating to reduced water consumption), improved nutrient use efficiency, comprising especially improved nitrogen (N)-use efficiency, delayed senescence and enhanced yield.
Within the enhancement of yield preference is given as to an improvement in the sedimentation value and the falling number as well as to the improvement of the protein and sugar content—especially with plants selected from the group of cereals (preferably wheat).
Preferably the novel use of the fungicidal (R)-enantiomers or compositions of the present invention relates to a combined use of a) preventively and/or curatively controlling pathogenic fungi, with or without resistance management, and b) at least one of enhanced root growth, improved greening, improved water use efficiency, delayed senescence and enhanced yield. From group b) enhancement of root system, water use efficiency and Nuse efficiency is particularly preferred.
The invention further comprises a method for treating seed.
The invention further relates to seed which has been treated by one of the methods described in the previous paragraph. The inventive seeds are employed in methods for the protection of seed from harmful microorganisms. In these methods, seed treated with at least one inventive mixture or composition is used.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions are also suitable for treating seed. A large part of the damage to crop plants caused by harmful organisms is triggered by the infection of the seed during storage or after sowing, and also during and after germination of the plant. This phase is particularly critical since the roots and shoots of the growing plant are particularly sensitive, and even minor damage may result in the death of the plant. There is therefore a great interest in protecting the seed and the germinating plant by using appropriate compositions.
The control of phytopathogenic fungi by treating the seed of plants has been known for a long time and is the subject of constant improvements. However, the treatment of seed entails a series of problems which cannot always be solved in a satisfactory manner. For instance, it is desirable to develop methods for protecting the seed and the germinating plant, which dispense with, or at least significantly reduce, the additional deployment of crop protection compositions after planting or after emergence of the plants. It is also desirable to optimize the amount of the active ingredient used so as to provide the best possible protection for the seed and the germinating plant from attack by phytopathogenic fungi, but without damaging the plant itself by the active ingredient employed. In particular, methods for the treatment of seed should also take account of the intrinsic fungicidal properties of transgenic plants in order to achieve optimal protection of the seed and the germinating plant with a minimum expenditure of crop protection compositions.
The present invention therefore also relates to a method for protection of seed and germinating plants from attack by phytopathogenic fungi, by treating the seed with an inventive composition. The invention likewise relates to the use of the inventive compositions for treatment of seed to protect the seed and the germinating plant from phytopathogenic fungi. The invention further relates to seed which has been treated with an inventive composition for protection from phytopathogenic fungi.
The control of phytopathogenic fungi which damage plants post-emergence is effected primarily by treating the soil and the above-ground parts of plants with crop protection compositions. Owing to the concerns regarding a possible influence of the crop protection compositions on the environment and the health of humans and animals, there are efforts to reduce the amount of active ingredients deployed.
One of the advantages of the present invention is that the particular systemic properties of the inventive mixtures or compositions mean that treatment of the seed with these active ingredients and compositions not only protects the seed itself, but also the resulting plants after emergence, from phytopathogenic fungi. In this way, the immediate treatment of the crop at the time of sowing or shortly thereafter can be dispensed with.
It is likewise considered to be advantageous that the inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions can especially also be used with transgenic seed, in which case the plant growing from this seed is capable of expressing a protein which acts against pests. By virtue of the treatment of such seed with the inventive mixtures or compositions, merely the expression of the protein, for example an insecticidal protein, can control certain pests. Surprisingly, a further synergistic effect can be observed in this case, which additionally increases the effectiveness for protection against attack by pests.
The inventive compositions are suitable for protecting seed of soy in agriculture. As also described below, the treatment of transgenic seed with the inventive mixtures or compositions is of particular significance. This relates to the seed of plants containing at least one heterologous gene which enables the expression of a polypeptide or protein having insecticidal properties. The heterologous gene in transgenic seed can originate, for example, from microorganisms of the species Bacillus, Rhizobium, Pseudomonas, Serratia, Trichoderma, Clavibacter, Glomus or Gliocladium. This heterologous gene preferably originates from Bacillus sp., in which case the gene product is effective against the European maize borer and/or the Western maize rootworm. The heterologous gene more preferably originates from Bacillus thuringiensis.

In the context of the present invention, the inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions are applied to the seed alone or in a suitable formulation. Preferably, the seed is treated in a state in which it is sufficiently stable for no damage to occur in the course of treatment. In general, the seed can be treated at any time between harvest and sowing. It is customary to use seed which has been separated from the plant and freed from cobs, shells, stalks, coats, hairs or the flesh of the fruits. For example, it is possible to use seed which has been harvested, cleaned and dried down to a moisture content of less than 15% by weight. Alternatively, it is also possible to use seed which, after drying, for example, has been treated with water and then dried again.
When treating the seed, care must generally be taken that the amount of the inventive composition applied to the seed and/or the amount of further additives is selected such that the germination of the seed is not impaired, or that the resulting plant is not damaged. This has to be borne in mind in particular in the case of mixtures or compositions which can have phytotoxic effects at certain application rates.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions can be applied directly, i.e. without containing any other components and without having been diluted. In general, it is preferable to apply the compositions to the seed in the form of a suitable formulation. Suitable formulations and methods for seed treatment are known to those skilled in the art and are described, for example, in the following documents: U.S. Pat. No. 4,272,417, U.S. Pat. No. 4,245,432, U.S. Pat. No. 4,808,430, U.S. Pat. No. 5,876,739, US 2003/0176428 A1, WO 2002/080675, WO 2002/028186.
The (R)-enantiomers or compositions usable in accordance with the invention can be converted to the customary seed dressing formulations, such as solutions, emulsions, suspensions, powders, foams, slurries or other coating compositions for seed, and also ULV formulations.
These formulations are prepared in a known manner, by mixing the active ingredients with customary additives, for example customary extenders and also solvents or diluents, dyes, wetting agents, dispersants, emulsifiers, antifoams, preservatives, secondary thickeners, adhesives, gibberellins and also water.
Useful dyes which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all dyes which are customary for such purposes. It is possible to use either pigments, which are sparingly soluble in water, or dyes, which are soluble in water. Examples include the dyes known by the names Rhodamine B, C.I. Pigment Red 112 and C.I. Solvent Red 1.
Useful wetting agents which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all substances which promote wetting and which are conventionally used for the formulation of active agrochemical ingredients. Preference is given to using alkyl naphthalenesulphonates, such as diisopropyl or diisobutyl naphthalenesulphonates.
Useful dispersants and/or emulsifiers which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all nonionic, anionic and cationic dispersants conventionally used for the formulation of active agrochemical ingredients. Usable with preference are nonionic or anionic dispersants or mixtures of nonionic or anionic dispersants. Suitable nonionic dispersants include especially ethylene oxide/propylene oxide block polymers, alkylphenol polyglycol ethers and tristryrylphenol polyglycol ether, and the phosphated or sulphated derivatives thereof. Suitable anionic dispersants are especially lignosulphonates, polyacrylic acid salts and arylsulphonate/formaldehyde condensates.
Antifoams which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all foam-inhibiting substances conventionally used for the formulation of active agrochemical ingredients. Silicone antifoams and magnesium stearate can be used with preference.
Preservatives which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all substances usable for such purposes in agrochemical compositions. Examples include dichlorophene and benzyl alcohol hemiformal.
Secondary thickeners which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all substances usable for such purposes in agrochemical compositions. Preferred examples include cellulose derivatives, acrylic acid derivatives, xanthan, modified clays and finely divided silica.
Adhesives which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention are all customary binders usable in seed dressing products. Preferred examples include polyvinylpyrrolidone, polyvinyl acetate, polyvinyl alcohol and tylose.
The gibberellins which may be present in the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention may preferably be gibberellins A1, A3 (=gibberellic acid), A4 and A7; particular preference is given to using gibberellic acid. The gibberellins are known (cf. R. Wegler “Chemie der Pflanzenschutz- and Schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel” [Chemistry of the Crop Protection Compositions and Pesticides], vol. 2, Springer Verlag, 1970, p. 401-412).
The seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention can be used, either directly or after previously having been diluted with water, for the treatment of a wide range of different seed, including the seed of transgenic plants. In this case, additional synergistic effects may also occur in interaction with the substances formed by expression.
For treatment of seed with the seed dressing formulations usable in accordance with the invention, or the preparations prepared therefrom by adding water, all mixing units usable customarily for the seed dressing are useful. Specifically, the procedure in the seed dressing is to place the seed into a mixer, to add the particular desired amount of seed dressing formulations, either as such or after prior dilution with water, and to mix everything until the formulation is distributed homogeneously on the seed. If appropriate, this is followed by a drying process.
In addition, the inventive treatment can reduce the mycotoxin content in the harvested material and the foods and feeds prepared therefrom. Mycotoxins include particularly, but not exclusively, the following: deoxynivalenol (DON), nivalenol, 15-Ac-DON, 3-Ac-DON, T2- and HT2-toxin, fumonisins, zearalenon, moniliformin, fusarin, diaceotoxyscirpenol (DAS), beauvericin, enniatin, fusaroproliferin, fusarenol, ochratoxins, patulin, ergot alkaloids and aflatoxins which can be produced, for example, by the following fungi: Fusarium spec., such as F. acuminatum, F. asiaticum, F. avenaceum, F. crookwellense, F. culmorum, F. graminearum (Gibberella zeae), F. equiseti, F. fujikoroi, F. musarum, F. oxysporum, F. proliferatum, F. poae, F. pseudograminearum, F. sambucinum, F. scirpi, F. semitectum, F. solani, F. sporotrichoides, F. langsethiae, F. sub glutinans, F. tricinctum, F. verticillioides etc., and also by Aspergillus spec., such as A. flavus, A. parasiticus, A. nomius, A. ochraceus, A. clavatus, A. terreus, A. versicolor, Penicillium spec., such as P. verrucosum, P. viridicatum, P. citrinum, P. expansum, P. claviforme, P. roqueforti, Claviceps spec., such as C. purpurea, C. fusiformis, C. paspali, C. africana, Stachybotrys spec. and others.

As already mentioned above, it is possible to treat all plants and their parts in accordance with the invention. In a preferred embodiment, wild plant species and plant cultivars, or those obtained by conventional biological breeding methods, such as crossing or protoplast fusion, and also parts thereof, are treated. In a further preferred embodiment, transgenic plants and plant cultivars obtained by genetic engineering methods, if appropriate in combination with conventional methods (Genetically Modified Organisms), and parts thereof are treated. The terms “parts” or “parts of plants” or “plant parts” have been explained above. More preferably, plants of the plant cultivars which are commercially available or are in use are treated in accordance with the invention. Plant cultivars are understood to mean plants which have new properties (“traits”) and have been obtained by conventional breeding, by mutagenesis or by recombinant DNA techniques. They can be cultivars, varieties, bio- or genotypes.
The method of treatment according to the invention can be used in the treatment of genetically modified organisms (GMOs), e.g. plants or seeds. Genetically modified plants (or transgenic plants) are plants of which a heterologous gene has been stably integrated into genome. The expression “heterologous gene” essentially means a gene which is provided or assembled outside the plant and when introduced in the nuclear, chloroplastic or mitochondrial genome gives the transformed plant new or improved agronomic or other properties by expressing a protein or polypeptide of interest or by downregulating or silencing other gene(s) which are present in the plant (using for example, antisense technology, cosuppression technology, RNA interference—RNAi—technology or microRNA—miRNA—technology). A heterologous gene that is located in the genome is also called a transgene. A transgene that is defined by its particular location in the plant genome is called a transformation or transgenic event.
Depending on the plant species or plant cultivars, their location and growth conditions (soils, climate, vegetation period, diet), the treatment according to the invention may also result in superadditive (“synergistic”) effects. Thus, for example, reduced application rates and/or a widening of the activity spectrum and/or an increase in the activity of the active compounds and compositions which can be used according to the invention, better plant growth, increased tolerance to high or low temperatures, increased tolerance to drought or to water or soil salt content, increased flowering performance, easier harvesting, accelerated maturation, higher harvest yields, bigger fruits, larger plant height, greener leaf color, earlier flowering, higher quality and/or a higher nutritional value of the harvested products, higher sugar concentration within the fruits, better storage stability and/or processability of the harvested products are possible, which exceed the effects which were actually to be expected.
At certain application rates, the mixtures or compositions according to the invention may also have a strengthening effect in plants. Accordingly, they are also suitable for mobilizing the defense system of the plant against attack by harmful microorganisms. This may, if appropriate, be one of the reasons of the enhanced activity of the mixtures or compositions according to the invention, for example against fungi. Plant-strengthening (resistance-inducing) substances are to be understood as meaning, in the present context, those substances or combinations of substances which are capable of stimulating the defense system of plants in such a way that, when subsequently inoculated with harmful microorganisms, the treated plants display a substantial degree of resistance to these microorganisms. In the present case, harmful microorganisms are to be understood as meaning phytopathogenic fungi, bacteria and viruses. Thus, the mixtures or compositions according to the invention can be employed for protecting plants against attack by the abovementioned pathogens within a certain period of time after the treatment. The period of time within which protection is effected generally extends from 1 to 10 days, preferably 1 to 7 days, after the treatment of the plants with the active compounds.
Plants and plant cultivars which are preferably to be treated according to the invention include all plants which have genetic material which impart particularly advantageous, useful traits to these plants (whether obtained by breeding and/or biotechnological means).
Plants and plant cultivars which are also preferably to be treated according to the invention are resistant against one or more biotic stresses, i.e. said plants show a better defense against animal and microbial pests, such as against nematodes, insects, mites, phytopathogenic fungi, bacteria, viruses and/or viroids.
Examples of nematode or insect resistant plants are described in e.g. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11/765,491, to Ser. Nos. 11/765,494, 10/926,819, 10/782,020, 12/032,479, 10/783,417, 10/782,096, 11/657,964, 12/192,904, 11/396,808, 12/166,253, 12/166,239, 12/166,124, 12/166,209, 11/762,886, 12/364,335, 11/763,947, 12/252,453, 12/209,354, 12/491,396, 12/497,221, 12/644,632, 12/646,004, 12/701,058, 12/718,059, 12/721,595, 12/638,591.
Plants and plant cultivars which may also be treated according to the invention are those plants which are resistant to one or more abiotic stresses. Abiotic stress conditions may include, for example, drought, cold temperature exposure, heat exposure, osmotic stress, flooding, increased soil salinity, increased mineral exposure, ozone exposure, high light exposure, limited availability of nitrogen nutrients, limited availability of phosphorus nutrients, shade avoidance.
Plants and plant cultivars which may also be treated according to the invention, are those plants characterized by enhanced yield characteristics. Increased yield in said plants can be the result of, for example, improved plant physiology, growth and development, such as water use efficiency, water retention efficiency, improved nitrogen use, enhanced carbon assimilation, improved photosynthesis, increased germination efficiency and accelerated maturation. Yield can furthermore be affected by improved plant architecture (under stress and non-stress conditions), including but not limited to, early flowering, flowering control for hybrid seed production, seedling vigor, plant size, internode number and distance, root growth, seed size, fruit size, pod size, pod or ear number, seed number per pod or ear, seed mass, enhanced seed filling, reduced seed dispersal, reduced pod dehiscence and lodging resistance. Further yield traits include seed composition, such as carbohydrate content, protein content, oil content and composition, nutritional value, reduction in anti-nutritional compounds, improved processability and better storage stability.

Plants that may be treated according to the invention are hybrid plants that already express the characteristic of heterosis or hybrid vigor which results in generally higher yield, vigor, health and resistance towards biotic and abiotic stresses). Such plants are typically made by crossing an inbred male-sterile parent line (the female parent) with another inbred male-fertile parent line (the male parent). Hybrid seed is typically harvested from the male sterile plants and sold to growers. Male sterile plants can sometimes (e.g. in corn) be produced by detasseling, i.e. the mechanical removal of the male reproductive organs (or males flowers) but, more typically, male sterility is the result of genetic determinants in the plant genome. In that case, and especially when seed is the desired product to be harvested from the hybrid plants it is typically useful to ensure that male fertility in the hybrid plants is fully restored. This can be accomplished by ensuring that the male parents have appropriate fertility restorer genes which are capable of restoring the male fertility in hybrid plants that contain the genetic determinants responsible for male-sterility. Genetic determinants for male sterility may be located in the cytoplasm. Examples of cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) were for instance described in Brassica species (WO 92/05251, WO 95/09910, WO 98/27806, WO 05/002324, WO 06/021972 and U.S. Pat. No. 6,229,072). However, genetic determinants for male sterility can also be located in the nuclear genome. Male sterile plants can also be obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering. A particularly useful means of obtaining male-sterile plants is described in WO 89/10396 in which, for example, a ribonuclease such as barnase is selectively expressed in the tapetum cells in the stamens. Fertility can then be restored by expression in the tapetum cells of a ribonuclease inhibitor such as batstar (e.g. WO 91/02069).
Plants or plant cultivars (obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may be treated according to the invention are herbicide-tolerant plants, i.e. plants made tolerant to one or more given herbicides. Such plants can be obtained either by genetic transformation, or by selection of plants containing a mutation imparting such herbicide tolerance.
Herbicide-resistant plants are for example glyphosate-tolerant plants, i.e. plants made tolerant to the herbicide glyphosate or salts thereof. Plants can be made tolerant to glyphosate through different means. For example, glyphosate-tolerant plants can be obtained by transforming the plant with a gene encoding the enzyme 5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase (EPSPS). Examples of such EPSPS genes are the AroA gene (mutant CT7) of the bacterium Salmonella typhimurium (Science 1983, 221, 370-371), the CP4 gene of the bacterium Agrobacterium sp. (Curr. Topics Plant Physiol. 1992, 7, 139-145), the genes encoding a Petunia EPSPS (Science 1986, 233, 478-481), a Tomato EPSPS (J. Biol. Chem. 1988, 263, 4280-4289), or an Eleusine EPSPS (WO 01/66704). It can also be a mutated EPSPS as described in for example EP 0837944, WO 00/66746, WO 00/66747 or WO 02/26995. Glyphosate-tolerant plants can also be obtained by expressing a gene that encodes a glyphosate oxido-reductase enzyme as described in U.S. Pat. No. 5,776,760 and U.S. Pat. No. 5,463,175. Glyphosate-tolerant plants can also be obtained by expressing a gene that encodes a glyphosate acetyl transferase enzyme as described in for example WO 02/036782, WO 03/092360, WO 2005/012515 and WO 2007/024782. Glyphosate-tolerant plants can also be obtained by selecting plants containing naturally-occurring mutations of the above-mentioned genes, as described in for example WO 01/024615 or WO 03/013226. Plants expressing EPSPS genes that confer glyphosate tolerance are described in e.g. U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 11/517,991, 10/739,610, 12/139,408, 12/352,532, 11/312,866, 11/315,678, 12/421,292, 11/400,598, 11/651,752, 11/681,285, 11/605,824, 12/468,205, 11/760,570, 11/762,526, 11/769,327, 11/769,255, 11/943801 or 12/362,774. Plants comprising other genes that confer glyphosate tolerance, such as decarboxylase genes, are described in e.g. U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 11/588,811, 11/185,342, 12/364,724, 11/185,560 or 12/423,926.
Other herbicide resistant plants are for example plants that are made tolerant to herbicides inhibiting the enzyme glutamine synthase, such as bialaphos, phosphinothricin or glufosinate. Such plants can be obtained by expressing an enzyme detoxifying the herbicide or a mutant glutamine synthase enzyme that is resistant to inhibition, e.g. described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11/760,602. One such efficient detoxifying enzyme is an enzyme encoding a phosphinothricin acetyltransferase (such as the bar or pat protein from Streptomyces species). Plants expressing an exogenous phosphinothricin acetyltransferase are for example described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,561,236; 5,648,477; 5,646,024; 5,273,894; 5,637,489; 5,276,268; 5,739,082; 5,908,810 and 7,112,665.
Further herbicide-tolerant plants are also plants that are made tolerant to the herbicides inhibiting the enzyme hydroxyphenylpyruvatedioxygenase (HPPD). HPPD is an enzyme that catalyze the reaction in which parahydroxyphenylpyruvate (HPP) is transformed into homogentisate. Plants tolerant to HPPD-inhibitors can be transformed with a gene encoding a naturally-occurring resistant HPPD enzyme, or a gene encoding a mutated or chimeric HPPD enzyme as described in WO 96/38567, WO 99/24585, WO 99/24586, WO 09/144079, WO 02/046387, or U.S. Pat. No. 6,768,044. Tolerance to HPPD-inhibitors can also be obtained by transforming plants with genes encoding certain enzymes enabling the formation of homogentisate despite the inhibition of the native HPPD enzyme by the HPPD-inhibitor. Such plants and genes are described in WO 99/34008 and WO 02/36787. Tolerance of plants to HPPD inhibitors can also be improved by transforming plants with a gene encoding an enzyme having prephenate deshydrogenase (PDH) activity in addition to a gene encoding an HPPDtolerant enzyme, as described in WO 04/024928. Further, plants can be made more tolerant to HPPD-inhibitor herbicides by adding into their genome a gene encoding an enzyme capable of metabolizing or degrading HPPD inhibitors, such as the CYP450 enzymes shown in WO 2007/103567 and WO 2008/150473.
Still further herbicide resistant plants are plants that are made tolerant to acetolactate synthase (ALS) inhibitors. Known ALS-inhibitors include, for example, sulfonylurea, imidazolinone, triazolopyrimidines, pryimidinyoxy(thio)benzoates, and/or sulfonylaminocarbonyltriazolinone herbicides. Different mutations in the ALS enzyme (also known as acetohydroxyacid synthase, AHAS) are known to confer tolerance to different herbicides and groups of herbicides, as described for example in Tranel and Wright (Weed Science 2002, 50, 700-712), but also, in U.S. Pat. No. 5,605,011, 5,378,824, 5,141,870, and 5,013,659. The production of sulfonylurea-tolerant plants and imidazolinone-tolerant plants is described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,605,011; 5,013,659; 5,141,870; 5,767,361; 5,731,180; 5,304,732; 4,761,373; 5,331,107; 5,928,937; and 5,378,824; and WO 96/33270. Other imidazolinone-tolerant plants are also described in for example WO 2004/040012, WO 2004/106529, WO 2005/020673, WO 2005/093093, WO 2006/007373, WO 2006/015376, WO 2006/024351, and WO 2006/060634. Further sulfonylurea- and imidazolinone-tolerant plants are also described in for example WO 2007/024782 and U.S. Patent Application 61/288,958.

Other plants tolerant to imidazolinone and/or sulfonylurea can be obtained by induced mutagenesis, selection in cell cultures in the presence of the herbicide or mutation breeding as described for example for soybeans in U.S. Pat. No. 5,084,082, for rice in WO 97/41218, for sugar beet in U.S. Pat. No. 5,773,702 and WO 99/057965, for lettuce in U.S. Pat. No. 5,198,599, or for sunflower in WO 01/065922.
Other plants tolerant to imidazolinone and/or sulfonylurea can be obtained by induced mutagenesis, selection in cell cultures in the presence of the herbicide or mutation breeding as described for example for soybeans in U.S. Pat. No. 5,084,082, for rice in WO 97/41218, for sugar beet in U.S. Pat. No. 5,773,702 and WO 99/057965, for lettuce in U.S. Pat. No. 5,198,599, or for sunflower in WO 01/065922.
Plants or plant cultivars (obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention are insect-resistant transgenic plants, i.e. plants made resistant to attack by certain target insects. Such plants can be obtained by genetic transformation, or by selection of plants containing a mutation imparting such insect resistance.
An “insect-resistant transgenic plant”, as used herein, includes any plant containing at least one transgene comprising a coding sequence encoding: 1) an insecticidal crystal protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or an insecticidal portion thereof, such as the insecticidal crystal proteins listed by Crickmore et al. (1998, Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 62: 807-813), updated by Crickmore et al. (2005) at the Bacillus thuringiensis toxin nomenclature, online at: http://www.lifesci.sussex.ac.uk/Home/Neil_Crickmore/Bt/), or insecticidal portions thereof, e.g., proteins of the Cry protein classes Cry1Ab, Cry1Ac, Cry1B, Cry1C, Cry1D, Cry1F, Cry2Ab, Cry3Aa, or Cry3Bb or insecticidal portions thereof (e.g. EP-A 1 999 141 and WO 2007/107302), or such proteins encoded by synthetic genes as e.g. described in and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 12/249,016; or 2) a crystal protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or a portion thereof which is insecticidal in the presence of a second other crystal protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or a portion thereof, such as the binary toxin made up of the Cry34 and Cry35 crystal proteins (Nat. Biotechnol. 2001, 19, 668-72; Applied Environm. Microbiol. 2006, 71, 1765-1774) or the binary toxin made up of the Cry1 A or Cry1F proteins and the Cry2Aa or Cry2Ab or Cry2Ae proteins (U.S. patent application Ser. No. 12/214,022 and EP-A 2 300 618); or 3) a hybrid insecticidal protein comprising parts of different insecticidal crystal proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis, such as a hybrid of the proteins of 1) above or a hybrid of the proteins of 2) above, e.g., the Cry1A.105 protein produced by corn event MON89034 (WO 2007/027777); or 4) a protein of any one of 1) to 3) above wherein some, particularly 1 to 10, amino acids have been replaced by another amino acid to obtain a higher insecticidal activity to a target insect species, and/or to expand the range of target insect species affected, and/or because of changes introduced into the encoding DNA during cloning or transformation, such as the Cry3Bb1 protein in corn events MON863 or MON88017, or the Cry3A protein in corn event MIR604; or 5) an insecticidal secreted protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or Bacillus cereus, or an insecticidal portion thereof, such as the vegetative insecticidal (VIP) proteins listed at: http://www.lifesci.sussex.ac.uk/home/Neil_Crickmore/Bt/vip.html, e.g., proteins from the VIP3Aa protein class; or 6) a secreted protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or Bacillus cereus which is insecticidal in the presence of a second secreted protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or B. cereus, such as the binary toxin made up of the VIP1A and VIP2A proteins (WO 94/21795); or 7) a hybrid insecticidal protein comprising parts from different secreted proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis or Bacillus cereus, such as a hybrid of the proteins in 1) above or a hybrid of the proteins in 2) above; or 8) a protein of any one of 5) to 7) above wherein some, particularly 1 to 10, amino acids have been replaced by another amino acid to obtain a higher insecticidal activity to a target insect species, and/or to expand the range of target insect species affected, and/or because of changes introduced into the encoding DNA during cloning or transformation (while still encoding an insecticidal protein), such as the VIP3Aa protein in cotton event COT 102; or 9) a secreted protein from Bacillus thuringiensis or Bacillus cereus which is insecticidal in the presence of a crystal protein from Bacillus thuringiensis, such as the binary toxin made up of VIP3 and Cry1A or Cry1F (U.S. Patent Applications 61/126,083 and 61/195,019), or the binary toxin made up of the VIP3 protein and the Cry2Aa or Cry2Ab or Cry2Ae proteins (U.S. patent application Ser. No. 12/214,022 and EP-A 2 300 618). 10) a protein of 9) above wherein some, particularly 1 to 10, amino acids have been replaced by another amino acid to obtain a higher insecticidal activity to a target insect species, and/or to expand the range of target insect species affected, and/or because of changes introduced into the encoding DNA during cloning or transformation (while still encoding an insecticidal protein)
Of course, an insect-resistant transgenic plant, as used herein, also includes any plant comprising a combination of genes encoding the proteins of any one of the above classes 1 to 10. In one embodiment, an insect-resistant plant contains more than one transgene encoding a protein of any one of the above classes 1 to 10, to expand the range of target insect species affected when using different proteins directed at different target insect species, or to delay insect resistance development to the plants by using different proteins insecticidal to the same target insect species but having a different mode of action, such as binding to different receptor binding sites in the insect.
An “insect-resistant transgenic plant”, as used herein, further includes any plant containing at least one transgene comprising a sequence producing upon expression a double-stranded RNA which upon ingestion by a plant insect pest inhibits the growth of this insect pest, as described e.g. in WO 2007/080126, WO 2006/129204, WO 2007/074405, WO 2007/080127 and WO 2007/035650.
Plants or plant cultivars (obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention are tolerant to abiotic stresses. Such plants can be obtained by genetic transformation, or by selection of plants containing a mutation imparting such stress resistance. Particularly useful stress tolerance plants include: 1) plants which contain a transgene capable of reducing the expression and/or the activity of poly(ADPribose) polymerase (PARP) gene in the plant cells or plants as described in WO 00/04173, WO 2006/045633, EP-A 1 807 519, or EP-A 2 018 431. 2) plants which contain a stress tolerance enhancing transgene capable of reducing the expression and/or the activity of the PARG encoding genes of the plants or plants cells, as described e.g. in WO 2004/090140. 3) plants which contain a stress tolerance enhancing transgene coding for a plant-functional enzyme of the nicotineamide adenine dinucleotide salvage synthesis pathway including nicotinamidase, nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase, nicotinic acid mononucleotide adenyl transferase, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide synthetase or nicotine amide phosphorybosyltransferase as described e.g. in EP-A 1 794 306, WO 2006/133827, WO 2007/107326, EP-A 1 999 263, or WO 2007/107326.

Plants or plant cultivars (obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention show altered quantity, quality and/or storage-stability of the harvested product and/or altered properties of specific ingredients of the harvested product such as: 1) transgenic plants which synthesize a modified starch, which in its physical-chemical characteristics, in particular the amylose content or the amylose/amylopectin ratio, the degree of branching, the average chain length, the side chain distribution, the viscosity behaviour, the gelling strength, the starch grain size and/or the starch grain morphology, is changed in comparison with the synthesised starch in wild type plant cells or plants, so that this is better suited for special applications. Said transgenic plants synthesizing a modified starch are disclosed, for example, in EP-A 0 571 427, WO 95/04826, EP-A 0 719 338, WO 96/15248, WO 96/19581, WO 96/27674, WO 97/11188, WO 97/26362, WO 97/32985, WO 97/42328, WO 97/44472, WO 97/45545, WO 98/27212, WO 98/40503, WO 99/58688, WO 99/58690, WO 99/58654, WO 00/08184, WO 00/08185, WO 00/08175, WO 00/28052, WO 00/77229, WO 01/12782, WO 01/12826, WO 02/101059, WO 03/071860, WO 04/056999, WO 05/030942, WO 2005/030941, WO 2005/095632, WO 2005/095617, WO 2005/095619, WO 2005/095618, WO 2005/123927, WO 2006/018319, WO 2006/103107, WO 2006/108702, WO 2007/009823, WO 00/22140, WO 2006/063862, WO 2006/072603, WO 02/034923, WO 2008/017518, WO 2008/080630, WO 2008/080631, EP 07090007.1, WO 2008/090008, WO 01/14569, WO 02/79410, WO 03/33540, WO 2004/078983, WO 01/19975, WO 95/26407, WO 96/34968, WO 98/20145, WO 99/12950, WO 99/66050, WO 99/53072, U.S. Pat. No. 6,734,341, WO 00/11192, WO 98/22604, WO 98/32326, WO 01/98509, WO 01/98509, WO 2005/002359, U.S. Pat. No. 5,824,790, U.S. Pat. No. 6,013,861, WO 94/04693, WO 94/09144, WO 94/11520, WO 95/35026, WO 97/20936, WO 2010/012796, WO 2010/003701, 2) transgenic plants which synthesize non starch carbohydrate polymers or which synthesize non starch carbohydrate polymers with altered properties in comparison to wild type plants without genetic modification. Examples are plants producing polyfructose, especially of the inulin and levan-type, as disclosed in EP-A 0 663 956, WO 96/01904, WO 96/21023, WO 98/39460, and WO 99/24593, plants producing alpha-1,4-glucans as disclosed in WO 95/31553, US 2002031826, U.S. Pat. No. 6,284,479, U.S. Pat. No. 5,712,107, WO 97/47806, WO 97/47807, WO 97/47808 and WO 00/14249, plants producing alpha-1,6 branched alpha-1,4-glucans, as disclosed in WO 00/73422, plants producing alternan, as disclosed in e.g. WO 00/47727, WO 00/73422, EP 06077301.7, U.S. Pat. No. 5,908,975 and EP-A 0 728 213, 3) transgenic plants which produce hyaluronan, as for example disclosed in WO 2006/032538, WO 2007/039314, WO 2007/039315, WO 2007/039316, JP-A 2006-304779, and WO 2005/012529. 4) transgenic plants or hybrid plants, such as onions with characteristics such as ‘high soluble solids content’, low pungency′ (LP) and/or ‘long storage’ (LS), as described in U.S. patent application Ser. Nos. 12/020,360 and 61/054,026.
Plants or plant cultivars (that can be obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention are plants, such as cotton plants, with altered fiber characteristics. Such plants can be obtained by genetic transformation, or by selection of plants contain a mutation imparting such altered fiber characteristics and include: a) Plants, such as cotton plants, containing an altered form of cellulose synthase genes as described in WO 98/00549. b) Plants, such as cotton plants, containing an altered form of rsw2 or rsw3 homologous nucleic acids as described in WO 2004/053219. c) Plants, such as cotton plants, with increased expression of sucrose phosphate synthase as described in WO 01/17333. d) Plants, such as cotton plants, with increased expression of sucrose synthase as described in WO 02/45485. e) Plants, such as cotton plants, wherein the timing of the plasmodesmatal gating at the basis of the fiber cell is altered, e.g. through downregulation of fiber-selective β-1,3-glucanase as described in WO 2005/017157, or as described in WO 2009/143995. f) Plants, such as cotton plants, having fibers with altered reactivity, e.g. through the expression of Nacetylglucosaminetransferase gene including nodC and chitin synthase genes as described in WO 2006/136351.
Plants or plant cultivars (that can be obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention are plants, such as oilseed rape or related Brassica plants, with altered oil profile characteristics. Such plants can be obtained by genetic transformation, or by selection of plants contain a mutation imparting such altered oil profile characteristics and include: a) Plants, such as oilseed rape plants, producing oil having a high oleic acid content as described e.g. in U.S. Pat. No. 5,969,169, U.S. Pat. No. 5,840,946 or U.S. Pat. No. 6,323,392 or U.S. Pat. No. 6,063,947 b) Plants such as oilseed rape plants, producing oil having a low linolenic acid content as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6,270,828, U.S. Pat. No. 6,169,190, or U.S. Pat. No. 5,965,755 c) Plant such as oilseed rape plants, producing oil having a low level of saturated fatty acids as described e.g. in U.S. Pat. No. 5,434,283 or U.S. patent application Ser. No. 12/668,303
Plants or plant cultivars (that can be obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention are plants, such as oilseed rape or related Brassica plants, with altered seed shattering characteristics. Such plants can be obtained by genetic transformation, or by selection of plants contain a mutation imparting such altered seed shattering characteristics and include plants such as oilseed rape plants with delayed or reduced seed shattering as described in U.S. Patent Application 61/135,230, WO 2009/068313 and WO 2010/006732.
Plants or plant cultivars (that can be obtained by plant biotechnology methods such as genetic engineering) which may also be treated according to the invention are plants, such as Tobacco plants, with altered posttranslational protein modification patterns, for example as described in WO 2010/121818 and WO 2010/145846.

Particularly useful transgenic plants which may be treated according to the invention are plants containing transformation events, or combination of transformation events, that are the subject of petitions for non-regulated status, in the United States of America, to the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) whether such petitions are granted or are still pending. At any time this information is readily available from APHIS (4700 River Road, Riverdale, Md. 20737, USA), for instance on its internet site (URL http://www.aphis.usda.gov/brs/not_reg.html). On the filing date of this application the petitions for nonregulated status that were pending with APHIS or granted by APHIS were those which contains the following information: Petition: the identification number of the petition. Technical descriptions of the transformation events can be found in the individual petition documents which are obtainable from APHIS, for example on the APHIS website, by reference to this petition number. These descriptions are herein incorporated by reference. Extension of Petition: reference to a previous petition for which an extension is requested. Institution: the name of the entity submitting the petition. Regulated article: the plant species concerned. Transgenic phenotype: the trait conferred to the plants by the transformation event. Transformation event or line: the name of the event or events (sometimes also designated as lines or lines) for which nonregulated status is requested. APHIS documents: various documents published by APHIS in relation to the Petition and which can be requested with APHIS.
Additional particularly useful plants containing single transformation events or combinations of transformation events are listed for example in the databases from various national or regional regulatory agencies (see for example http://gmoinfajrcit/gmp_browse.aspx and http://www.agbios.com/dbase.php).
Particularly useful transgenic plants which may be treated according to the invention are soybean plants containing transformation events, or a combination of transformation events, and that are listed for example in the databases for various national or regional regulatory agencies including Event BPS-CV127-9 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as NCIMB No. 41603, described in WO 2010/080829); Event DAS68416 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC PTA-10442, described in WO 2011/066384 or WO 2011/066360); Event DP-356043-5 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC PTA-8287, described in US-A 2010-0184079 or WO 2008/002872); Event EE-1 (brinjal, insect control, not deposited, described in WO 2007/091277); Event FI117 (corn, herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC 209031, described in US-A 2006-059581 or WO 98/044140); Event GA21 (corn, herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC 209033, described in US-A 2005-086719 or WO 98/044140), Event LL27 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as NCIMB41658, described in WO 2006/108674 or US-A 2008-320616); Event LL55 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as NCIMB 41660, described in WO 2006/108675 or US-A 2008-196127); Event MON87701 (soybean, insect control, deposited as ATCC PTA-8194, described in US-A 2009-130071 or WO 2009/064652); Event MON87705 (soybean, quality trait-herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC PTA-9241, described in US-A 2010-0080887 or WO 2010/037016); Event MON87708 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC PTA9670, described in WO 2011/034704); Event MON87754 (soybean, quality trait, deposited as ATCC PTA-9385, described in WO 2010/024976); Event MON87769 (soybean, quality trait, deposited as ATCC PTA-8911, described in US-A 2011-0067141 or WO 2009/102873); Event MON89788 (soybean, herbicide tolerance, deposited as ATCC PTA-6708, described in US-A 2006-282915 or WO 2006/130436).
Particularly useful conventionally plants which may be treated according to the invention are soybean plants which are tolerant to Asian rust, stem cancer or Frog eye-leaf spot.
The plants or plant varieties used according to the present invention are ASR-tolerant, Stem canker resistant and/or Frog leaf spot resistant. Preferably, the ASR tolerance of the plant or plant varieties according to the present invention is conferred by a gene selected from the group consisting of Rpp1, Rpp2, Rpp3, Rpp4 and Rpp5 or a combination thereof. Most preferably, the ASR tolerance is conferred by a gene selected from the group consisting of Rpp2, Rpp4 and Rpp5 or a combination thereof.
The plants or plant varieties used according to the present invention are not transgenic. Transgenic organisms are produced by introducing an exogenous gene (a transgene) into a living organism using genetic engineering so that the organism will exhibit a new property. The genetic material of transgenic plants has been modified by the use of recombinant DNA techniques that under natural circumstances cannot readily be obtained by cross breeding, mutations or natural recombination, whereby the modification confers ASR-tolerance, Stem canker resistantance and/or Frog-eye leaf spot resistance or confers the increase of ASR-tolerance, Stem canker resistance and/or Frog-eye leaf spot resistance.
When using the inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions as fungicides, the application rates can be varied within a relatively wide range, depending on the kind of application. The application rate of the mixtures or compositions is in the case of treatment of plant parts, for example leaves: from 0.1 to 10 000 g/ha, preferably from 10 to 1000 g/ha, more preferably from 10 to 800 g/ha, even more preferably from 50 to 300 g/ha (in the case of application by watering or dripping, it is even possible to reduce the application rate, especially when inert substrates such as rockwool or perlite are used); in the case of seed treatment: from 2 to 200 g per 100 kg of seed, preferably from 3 to 150 g per 100 kg of seed, more preferably from 2.5 to 25 g per 100 kg of seed, even more preferably from 2.5 to 12.5 g per 100 kg of seed; in the case of soil treatment: from 0.1 to 10 000 g/ha, preferably from 1 to 5000 g/ha.
These application rates are merely by way of example and are not limiting for the purposes of the invention.
The inventive (R)-enantiomers or compositions can thus be used to protect plants from attack by the pathogens mentioned for a certain period of time after treatment. The period for which protection is provided extends generally for 1 to 28 days, preferably for 1 to 14 days, more preferably for 1 to 10 days, most preferably for 1 to 7 days, after the treatment of the plants with the mixtures or compositions, or for up to 200 days after a seed treatment.
The plants listed can particularly advantageously be treated in accordance with the invention with the inventive mixtures or compositions. The preferred ranges stated above for the mixtures or compositions also apply to the treatment of these plants. Particular emphasis is given to the treatment of plants with the mixtures or compositions specifically mentioned in the present text.
The invention is illustrated by the examples below. However, the invention is not limited to the examples
Racemic carboxamides according to formula (I) are prepared according to one of the methods already described in the literature (cf. WO 1986/02641 A, WO 1992/12970 A, JP 2010-83869, WO 2011162397 A). The racemate is separated by preparative HPLC on a chiral stationary phase. The stereochemical characterization of the two separated enantiomers is then carried out using customary methods known from the literature, such as X-ray structural analysis for identifying the R/S enantiomer and the determination of the optical rotation for determining the (R)/(S) enantiomer. The two enantiomers are additionally characterized by 1H-NMR and a chiral shift reagent.